warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0123.pdf
sha256: E9E7005CACFDC427BAC7312034FC5D195D9E0C70545B12E7ABC89885F4D5F2EC
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 6
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
 
 
978-1-6654-5690-6/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE 
Visual-based landing system of a multirotor UAV in
GNSS denied environment
Adam MARUT
Faculty of Mechatronics, Armament and Aerospace
Military University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
adam.marut@wat.edu.pl
Przemysław WOJCIECHOWSKI
Faculty of Mechatronics, Armament and Aerospace
Military University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
przemyslaw.wojciechowski@wat.edu.pl
Konrad WOJTOWICZ
Faculty of Mechatronics, Armament and Aerospace
Military University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
konrad.wojtowicz@wat.edu.pl
Krzysztof FALKOWSKI
Faculty of Mechatronics, Armament and Aerospace
Military University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
krzysztof.falkowski@wat.edu.pl
Abstract—Visual-based landing systems for multirotor un-
manned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have become an active research
area in robotics and aviation. The availability of GNSS signals
is essential for most commercial UAVs, but unfortunately, these
signals can be lost in certain environments or intentionally denied
in military operations. Therefore, visual-based landing systems
can provide an alternative solution to enable a low-cost system
for precisely landing UAVs in GNSS-denied environments. This
paper overviews recent research on visual-based landing systems
for multirotor UAVs in a highly unfamiliar environment. The
paper presents a comprehensive review of various vision-based
techniques, such as optical flow, stereo vision, monocular visual
odometry, and deep learning-based methods, which have been
proposed for the accurate landing of UAVs in GNSS-denied
environments. This paper proposes a multi-camera landing aid
system based on ArUco markers. Proposed system allows for a
precision landing of the UAV with a pre-programmed approach
trajectory. The paper also highlights the challenges and limita-
tions of this topic and provides potential directions for future
research. This paper aims to provide a valuable resource for
researchers, engineers, and practitioners interested in developing
visual-based landing systems for multirotor UAVs in GNSS-
denied environments.
Index Terms—UAV, multirotor, landing, ArUco, non-GNSS
environment
I. INTRODUCTION
Due to the widespread use of UAVs in various areas of life
- from toys through scientific research to military applications,
there is a need for continuous development of systems support-
ing their safe use. One commonly known problem when using
UAVs is the landing system, which requires an appropriate
precision and reliability. There are many problems in this
topic that drone designers have to deal with. The fundamental
problems with UAV landing systems can vary depending on
the type of landing system used. However, some common
problems that must be taken into account when designing a
landing system are [1]–[3]:
• limited accuracy: UAV landing systems can be limited in
their accuracy due to a variety of factors such as sensor
noise, environmental conditions, and system calibration
errors;
• limited range: Many UAV landing systems have a limited
range, which can be problematic when landing in large
or unfamiliar environments;
• limited availability: Some UAV landing systems, such as
GNSS-based systems, may not be available in specific
environments, such as indoor or urban environments, or
when GNSS signals are jammed or disrupted;
• sensitivity to environmental conditions: Some landing
systems, such as visual-based systems, can be sensitive
to changes in lighting conditions or weather, which can
affect their performance and accuracy;
• computational requirements: Some UAV landing systems
require significant computational resources, which can
be a challenge for onboard processing and real-time
operation;
• cost: Some UAV landing systems can be expensive, which
can be a barrier to adoption for some applications.
One of the applications of the proposed solution would be the
possibility of the precise landing of unmanned systems used
in automatic missions in the Ground Docking Station.
II. RELATED WORK
The most popular landing systems for multirotor UAVs
are GNSS-based landing systems and visual-based landing
systems.
GNSS-based landing systems use GNSS to determine the
position and altitude of the UAV, and are widely used due
to their high accuracy and reliability. Visual-based landing
systems use computer vision techniques to estimate the po-
sition and orientation of the UAV based on visual features in
the environment. Other landing systems for multirotor UAVs
include LiDAR-based systems, which use lasers to measure
the distance to the ground, and sonar-based systems, which
use sound waves to determine altitude. These systems can
308
2023 IEEE 10th International Workshop on Metrology for AeroSpace (MetroAeroSpace) | 978-1-6654-5690-6/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/METROAEROSPACE57412.2023.10190013
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
 
 
be helpful in environments where GNSS signals and visual
features are unavailable, such as in fog or low-light conditions
[4]. However, they can be limited by their range and sensitivity
to noise and interference.
Due to the need to increase the possibilities of UAV
flights in various conditions, technologies related to landing
systems are constantly being developed. As an alternative
to the traditional systems based on GNSS systems (which
can be limited in environments where GNSS signals are
not available, such as indoor or urban environments, or in
situations where GNSS signals are jammed or disrupted), the
most frequently mentioned in the literature are landing systems
supported by vision systems. These systems rely on cameras or
other imaging sensors to obtain visual information about the
environment and use algorithms to process this information
to determine the UAV’s position and orientation relative to
the ground. Some techniques used in visual-based landing
systems include optical flow, stereo vision, monocular visual
odometry, and deep learning-based methods. These techniques
allow UAVs to land with high accuracy, even in environments
where GNSS signals are unavailable or unreliable.
A. Optical flow-based methods
In this case, methods rely on the UAV camera’s motion
to estimate the UAV’s motion relative to the ground. These
methods work by analyzing the changes in the optical flow
pattern between consecutive frames of the camera feed. Opti-
cal flow-based methods are computationally efficient and can
work in real-time, but they may be susceptible to errors caused
by lighting conditions or changes in the camera’s orientation
[5]–[10].
B. Stereo vision-based methods
These methods use two or more cameras mounted on the
UAV to estimate the depth and position of objects in the envi-
ronment. These methods work by triangulating the position of
objects based on the disparities between the images captured
by the different cameras. Stereo vision-based methods can
provide highly accurate 3D information about the environment,
but they may be more computationally intensive and require
a more complex setup [11], [12].
C. Monocular visual methods
Methods use a single camera mounted on the UAV to esti-
mate the UAV’s position and orientation relative to the ground.
Visual odometry analyzes the changes in the camera’s view
of the environment between consecutive frames. Monocular
visual odometry-based methods are computationally efficient
and require only a single camera, but they may be susceptible
to drift and accumulation of errors over time [13], [14].
Monocular visual methods can also detect unique pattern, such
as a runway, to estimate the desired path. Such an approach
is commonly used with fixed-wing UAVs [15].
D. Infrared marker-based methods
Methods use a single IR camera to detect passive or active
markers and calculate position using geometric relationships of
detected points or shapes [16]. Such an approach can be used
simultaneously with a high-precision GPS to build a reliable
system [17].
E. Deep learning-based methods
In recent years, deep learning-based methods have also been
proposed for visual-based landing systems. These methods
use convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn features
from images captured by the UAV’s camera and use these
features to estimate the UAV’s position and orientation. Deep
learning-based methods can provide highly accurate results,
but they require large amounts of training data and may be
computationally expensive [3], [18]–[22].
Overall, each of these vision-based techniques has its
strengths and weaknesses. The choice of technique depends
on the specific requirements of the landing system and the
usage scenario.
III. THE PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
Currently, multirotor UAV’s visual landing aid systems have
gained vast popularity. The proposed methodology improves
the reliability and accuracy of such a system. Quality of
measurement by visual methods is highly dependent on lens’s
focal parameters and the camera sensor’s resolution. Increasing
the resolution of the sensor is pointless due to deteriorating
quality in low light conditions and increasing demand for
computing power. Available camera modules are equipped
with a fixed focal length. Therefore, several modules with
different parameters should ensure a wide measurement range.
A. System hardware architecture
The proposed hardware solution includes three camera
modules with an ultra-wide, wide and telephoto lens (Fig. 1).
Cameras are connected to the NVidia Jetson AGX Xavier com-
puting unit. Gathered image data is processed on individual
ROS nodes using the ArUco algorithm [23]–[25] to determine
displacement vectors between each camera and the ArUco
marker placed on the landing spot. Utilization of multiple
cameras provides seamless UAV pose measurement in a range
of 0.2-80 meters. Gimbal stabilization of the module provides
isolation from vibrations and angular deviations of the UAV
during the landing process. It also provides marker tracking,
what is crucial during landing on a path not perpendicular to
the landing spot.
309
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
 
 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 1: Concept of multiple camera system utilization:
a) laboratory stand; b) ultra-wide angle camera view;
c) wide-angle camera view; d) telephoto camera view.
B. System software architecture
The system is designed to work with all MAVLink-
compliant autopilots [26] (development is conducted on The
Orange Cube Orange). The crucial part of the landing system
is companion computer - NVidia Jetson AGX Xavier. NVidia
is connected via UART to the autopilot and three specialized
camera modules. Gimbal is controlled via MAVLink com-
mands sent from the ROS node on NVidia Jetson to provide
marker tracking. Software implementation shown in Fig. 2
includes:
• ROS - for data flow management;
• OpenCV - for image preparation and analysis;
• ArUco library - for UAV pose estimation;
• MAVROS - for controlling the UAV based on calculated
position vectors.
ROS
Camera 
node
Camera 
node
Camera 
node
UAV position 
estimation
Automatic 
landing 
algorithm
ArduPilot 
MAVROS
Fig. 2: System software architecture.
The ArUco algorithm is chosen among other vision-based
methods due to its capability of pose estimation with a single
camera and single marker. Moreover, the simplicity of a
graphical pattern provides a high measurement range and ro-
bustness of detection. [27] Employing the ArUco library with
Discriminative Correlation Filters (Tr-Aruco) [28] provides
robust position estimation with motion blur on camera footage.
Tr-Aruco provides continuous position measurement during
the landing in the environment with wind gusts causing the
camera to wobble.
During static measurement, the range over 50 meters was
obtained with VGA (640x480 px) camera with a telephoto lens
(Fig. 3). In current work, FullHD (1920x1080 px) camera set
is used. The working range and measurement accuracy will be
significantly improved.
IV. RESEARCH PROCEDURE
A. Position calculation algorithm
Each camera node detects visible ArUco markers. If de-
tection is successful, the algorithm calculates translation and
rotation vectors between the camera module and the marker.
When more than one camera determines the position, the UAV
position estimation node calculates a weighted average (1) of
the obtained displacement vectors.
X =
Pn
i=1 wiai
Pn
i=1 wi
(1)
where: X - calculated value, w - input value, a - weight.
The weight value depends on the area covered by the marker
in the captured image from the camera.
B. Automatic landing procedure
The automatic landing algorithm (Fig. 4), using information
about the UAV position obtained from the position estimation
node, determines the descent path. In case of losing the marker
from sight, the drone stops descending and uses the gimbal to
search the area to find the marker again. In working conditions,
the ROS node utilizes the MAVROS library to control the UAV
movement and camera gimbal angles.
C. Scheduled tests
The research process of the landing system includes a
series of tests to determine the conditions under which it is
used optimally. To verify the accuracy of the landing system,
UAV is equipped with an RTK-capable GNSS receiver to
measure flight trajectory with high accuracy. Autopilot works
in Guided NoGPS mode. The RTK Base Station determines
landing site position coordinates.
Planned tests cover:
• Multiple landing approaches with non-GPS conditions:
The basic test performs multiple landing approaches from
different heights and descent angles. It allows determin-
ing the boundary conditions under which the system
can perform the landing process correctly, and the space
around the ArUco marker required to land safely.
• Different light intensity:
Additional tests in various lighting conditions identify the
minimum light intensity values at which landing in non-
GPS conditions is possible.
• Marker recognition with IR:
The next test is to check the possibility of using infrared
light to illuminate the markers in order to detect them and
use them during landing in conditions without lighting.
310
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
 
 
Fig. 3: Static measurement with ArUco system on VGA camera with 25mm lens
• Various ArUco marker sizes:
Determining the minimum dimensions of ArUco tags that
can be detected from various flight altitudes allows for
selecting of optimal sizes that give the best chance of
being recognized by the UAV.
• Various lenses sets:
Determining the optimal camera set optics parameters
to provide a high measurement range and high accuracy
during the final approach.
• Different landing approach trajectories:
Recognition of the most optimal glide path trajectory
guarantees no marker loss from the field of view.
• Verification of landing accuracy:
Determining the accuracy of the precision landing system,
including landing in a docking station model.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
There are several potential directions for future research
on visual-based landing systems for UAVs in GNSS-denied
environments.
• Integration with other sensors:
Visual-based landing systems can be integrated with other
sensors such as LiDAR, radar, or sonar to improve the
accuracy and robustness of the system.
• Machine learning:
Using machine learning techniques such as reinforcement
learning, deep learning, or Bayesian inference can im-
prove the accuracy and robustness of visual-based landing
systems. These techniques can be used to learn from past
experiences and adapt to new environments.
• Multi-modal sensor fusion:
Visual-based landing systems can be combined with
other sensor modalities [29], such as infrared or acoustic
sensors, to provide a more comprehensive view of the
environment.
• Cooperative localization:
Cooperative localization techniques can be used to share
information between multiple UAVs in a fleet to improve
the accuracy and robustness of visual-based landing sys-
tems.
• Hardware improvements:
Advances in camera technology, such as higher resolution
and a wider field of view, can improve the accuracy and
range of visual-based landing systems.
• Development of new algorithms:
Developing new algorithms that are more robust to
changes in lighting conditions, terrain, and weather can
improve the accuracy and robustness of visual-based
landing systems.
• Real-world testing:
Further testing of visual-based landing systems in real-
world environments can help to identify and address any
limitations or challenges of the technology.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Wang, B. Wang, C. Tang, and G. Xu, “Pose and velocity estimation
algorithm for uav in visual landing,” in 2020 39th Chinese Control
Conference (CCC), 2020, pp. 3713–3718.
311
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
 
 
Begin landing
Found landing site 
marker
Track landing site 
with gimbal 
Merge position 
data
Perform precise 
landing
End
No
Yes
Calculate position 
of the UAV with 
ultrawide lens
Calculate position 
of the UAV with 
wide lens
Calculate position 
of the UAV with 
telephoto lens
Search for landing 
site with telephoto 
camera
Fig. 4: Landing algorithm.
[2] A.
Kumar,
“Real-time
performance
comparison
of
vision-based
autonomous landing of quadcopter on a ground moving target,” IETE
Journal of Research, vol. 0, no. 0, pp. 1–18, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/03772063.2021.1963332
[3] M.
Y.
Arafat,
M.
M.
Alam,
and
S.
Moh,
“Vision-based
navigation techniques for unmanned aerial vehicles: Review and
challenges,”
Drones,
vol.
7,
no.
2,
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2504-446X/7/2/89
[4] Z. Rochala, K. Wojtowicz, P. Kordowski, and B. Brzozowski, “Exper-
imental tests of the obstacles detection technique in the hemispherical
area for an underground explorer uav,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic
Systems Magazine, vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 18–26, 2019.
[5] K. Y. Scheper and G. C. de Croon, “Evolution of robust high
speed optical-flow-based landing for autonomous mavs,” Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, vol. 124, p. 103380, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889019302404
[6] J. Dupeyroux, J. J. Hagenaars, F. Paredes-Vall´es, and G. C. H. E.
de Croon, “Neuromorphic control for optic-flow-based landing of mavs
using the loihi processor,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2021, pp. 96–102.
[7] K. Y. Scheper and G. C. de Croon, “Evolution of robust high
speed optical-flow-based landing for autonomous mavs,” Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, vol. 124, p. 103380, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889019302404
[8] G. Croon, C. De Wagter, and T. Seidl, “Enhancing optical-flow-based
control by learning visual appearance cues for flying robots,” Nature
Machine Intelligence, vol. 3, pp. 33–41, 01 2021.
[9] A. Miller, B. Miller, A. Popov, and K. Stepanyan, “Uav landing based
on the optical flow videonavigation,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 6, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/6/1351
[10] Z. Lin, W. Wang, Y. Li, X. Zhang, T. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Wu, and
F. Huang, “Design and experimental study of a novel semi-physical
unmanned-aerial-vehicle simulation platform for optical-flow-based
navigation,” Aerospace, vol. 10, no. 2, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2226-4310/10/2/183
[11] M. Mittal, R. Mohan, W. Burgard, and A. Valada, “Vision-based
autonomous uav navigation and landing for urban search and rescue,”
in Robotics Research, T. Asfour, E. Yoshida, J. Park, H. Christensen,
and O. Khatib, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022,
pp. 575–592.
[12] Z. Liu, C. Wang, K. Chen, and W. Meng, “Vision-based autonomous
landing on unprepared field with rugged surface,” IEEE Sensors Journal,
vol. 22, no. 18, pp. 17 914–17 923, 2022.
[13] Y. Nabavi, D. Asadi, and K. Ahmadi, “Automatic landing control of a
multi-rotor uav using a monocular camera,” J. Intell. Robotics Syst., vol.
105, no. 3, jul 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-
022-01655-8
[14] H.
Deng,
U.
Arif,
K.
Yang,
Z.
Xi,
Q.
Quan,
and
K.-
Y.
Cai,
“Global
optical
flow-based
estimation
of
velocity
for
multicopters using monocular vision in gps-denied environments,”
Optik,
vol.
219,
p.
164923,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0030402620307592
[15] “Research on application of computer vision assist technology in
high-precision uav navigation and positioning,” in 2020 IEEE 3rd
International Conference on Information Systems and Computer Aided
Education (ICISCAE).
[16] J. Janousek and P. Marcon, “Precision landing options in unmanned
aerial vehicles,” in 2018 International Interdisciplinary PhD Workshop
(IIPhDW), 2018, pp. 58–60.
[17] P. Marcon, J. Janousek, and R. Kadlec, “Vision-based and differen-
tial global positioning system to ensure precise autonomous landing
of uavs,” in 2018 Progress in Electromagnetics Research Symposium
(PIERS-Toyama), 2018, pp. 542–546.
[18] R. Wang and J. Zou, Vision-Based Landing Site Detection for Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle: A Review, 01 2022, pp. 946–954.
[19] N. Q. Truong, P. H. Nguyen, S. H. Nam, and K. R. Park, “Deep learning-
based super-resolution reconstruction and marker detection for drone
landing,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 61 639–61 655, 2019.
[20] P. Mathur, Y. Jangir, and N. Goveas, “A generalized kalman filter
augmented deep-learning based approach for autonomous landing in
mavs,” in 2021 International Symposium of Asian Control Association
on Intelligent Robotics and Industrial Automation (IRIA), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[21] T. Swain, M. Rath, J. Mishra, S. Banerjee, and T. Samant, “Deep
reinforcement learning based target detection for unmanned aerial vehi-
cle,” in 2022 IEEE India Council International Subsections Conference
(INDISCON), 2022, pp. 1–5.
[22] M. Paszkuta, J. Rosner, D. Peszor, M. Szender, M. Wojciechowska,
K. Wojciechowski, and J. P. Nowacki, “Uav on-board emergency safe
landing spot detection system combining classical and deep learning-
based segmentation methods,” in Intelligent Information and Database
Systems, N. T. Nguyen, S. Chittayasothorn, D. Niyato, and B. Trawi´nski,
Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 467–478.
[23] F. Romero-Ramirez, R. Mu˜noz-Salinas, and R. Medina-Carnicer,
“Speeded up detection of squared fiducial markers,” Image and Vision
Computing, vol. 76, 06 2018.
[24] S. Garrido-Jurado, R. Mu˜noz-Salinas, F. Madrid-Cuevas, and R. Medina-
Carnicer, “Generation of fiducial marker dictionaries using mixed integer
linear programming,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 51, 10 2015.
[25] K. Wojtowicz and P. Wojciechowski, “Synchronous control of a group
of flying robots following a leader uav in an unfamiliar environment,”
Sensors, vol. 23, no. 2, 2023.
[26] M. Waliszkiewicz, K. Wojtowicz, Z. Rochala, and E. Balestrieri, “The
design and implementation of a custom platform for the experimental
tuning of a quadcopter controller,” Sensors (Switzerland), vol. 20, no. 7,
2020.
[27] K. Wojtowicz and P. Wojciechowski, “Synchronous control of a
group of flying robots following a leader uav in an unfamiliar
environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 2, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/23/2/740
[28] F. Romero-Ramirez, R. Mu˜noz-Salinas, and R. Medina-Carnicer,
“Tracking fiducial markers with discriminative correlation filters,” 06
2020.
312
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
 
 
[29] B. Brzozowski, Z. Rochala, K. Wojtowicz, and P. Wieczorek, “Measure-
ment data fusion with cascaded kalman and complementary filter in the
flight parameter indicator for hang-glider and paraglider,” Measurement:
Journal of the International Measurement Confederation, vol. 123, pp.
94–101, 2018.
313
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
