warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0489.pdf
sha256: DA3CD2F445E4DA1FBB97F9585645D46A1A250A36F660A2EE2EA3A261EBD71DF9
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 16
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2022
4825
UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Integration for
Land Vehicle Autonomous Navigation
Jing Dong, Xingyu Ren
, Songlai Han
, and Shilin Luo
Abstract—Autonomous navigation without external GNSS aid-
ing is crucial for some kinds of land vehicle applications, such as
military vehicles and unmanned vehicles navigation under GNSS
denied environments. A typical solution for autonomous navigation
can be achieved by integrating Inertial Navigation System (INS)
and odometer, where the odometer can provide velocity aiding
for INS. The INS/odometer integration approach can dramatically
improve the navigation performances compared with the stan-
daloneINSapproach,howeveritspositioningerrorisstillgradually
accumulating with time because of lacking external position cor-
rection. This paper proposes an approach to aid the INS/odometer
integration by using vision positioning, where a UAV is used to
carry the vision camera and helps to realize the positioning of
the vehicle by image matching. The UAV vision positioning acts
a role like GNSS and provides constant position correction for
INS/odometer integration. A dual-rate Kalman ﬁlter is proposed
and utilized to realize the data fusing of vision, INS and odometer.
Simulation and ﬁled tests show that the proposed approach can
dramaticallyimprovetheautonomousnavigationperformancesfor
land vehicles.
Index Terms—Autonomous Navigation, Data Fusion, Inertial
Navigation, Image Matching, Land Vehicle.
I. INTRODUCTION
A
UTONOMOUS navigation without external signals, es-
pecially GNSS, aiding is becoming more and more im-
portant for a lot of demanding navigation applications under
challenging circumstances. For example, unmanned cars and
their applications are developing very fast in recent years [1],
[2]. The navigation requirements for unmanned cars are very
demanding, considering the complex driving conditions and the
reliability and safety requirements [3], [4]. The conventional
and widely used stand-alone INS or INS/GNSS integration
navigation schemes cannot guarantee the performances and
functionality requirements for unmanned cars [5]. In another
ﬁeld, military vehicles, such as missile launch vehicles and
artillery geodesic vehicles, GNSS related navigation schemes
Manuscript received February 3, 2021; revised May 26, 2021, September 12,
2021, and December 20, 2021; accepted January 24, 2022. Date of publication
February 16, 2022; date of current version May 20, 2022. This work was
supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grants 61203199 and 61802423 and in part by the Natural Science Foundation
of Hunan Province, China, under Grant 2020JJ5663. The review of this article
was coordinated by Prof. Yao Ma. (Corresponding author: Songlai Han.)
The authors are with the School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Cen-
tral South University, Changsha 410083, China (e-mail: dongjing1756@126.
com; 1770299838@qq.com; songlai.han@csu.edu.cn; 739982778@qq.com).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TVT.2022.3151729
are generally refused because of their easily-spoofed and inter-
fered characteristics [6]. Aiming at the aforementioned demand-
ing navigation requirements, a novel autonomous navigation
scheme will be discussed in following work.
INSandodometerintegratednavigationsystemisatypicalau-
tonomous navigation approach [7]–[10], which doesn’t rely on
any external aiding. The divergence of the INS navigation can be
effectively constrained by the odometer derived velocity. How-
ever, the position errors and, as a result, the attitudes and heading
errors will still grow slowly with time because of the absence of
position correction for the INS/odometer integration [11], [12].
For example, for navigation-grade INS/odometer integration,
the typical positioning error is between 1%D to 0.1%D, where
D is the travelling distance of the vehicle [13]–[15]. This means
that the positioning error will exceed 10 to 100 meters for 10
kilometers vehicle travelling, which is not acceptable for the
aforementioned autonomous navigation applications.
The integration of GNSS with INS can solve the above prob-
lem. Literatures [16]–[18] uses the Extended Kalman Filter to
integrate the INS with GNSS, and literatures [19]–[22] uses the
Factor Graph Optimization to integrate the INS with GNSS. By
introducing GNSS into the navigation system, the positioning
error of the vehicles or robots can be restricted to a better scope.
However, the introducing of GNSS will break the autonomous
characteristics of the navigation system [23], [24]. Furthermore,
the using of GNSS can be seriously affected by the GNSS denied
environments. According to the denial characteristics, the GNSS
denied environments can be classiﬁed into short-term signal
denials, such as signal blocking and occasional interfering, and
long-term denials, such as regional shutting down and regional
interfering of GNSS signals which generally occur in military
restraints or conﬂicts. For the shot-term signal denials of GNSS,
such as the signal blocking because of bridge or tunnel, the
GNSS performances can recover quickly. However, under long-
term GNSS denial scenarios, such as regional shunting down of
GNSS signal in border area because of conﬂicts, the GNSS will
be completely unavailable for navigation applications.
In recent years, simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) based land vehicle navigation has been extensively
studied [25]–[27]. However, due to the drift problem of the
track, SLAM also has accumulated errors like the INS/Odometer
system. To solve the problem, closed-loop optimization is em-
ployed by SLAM to correct the accumulated errors [25]. SLAM
is a feasible solution for vehicle navigation in indoor scenarios
where the closed-loop path is generally available. However, the
closed-loop optimization cannot be properly used in land vehicle
0018-9545 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
4826
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2022
navigation under open environments, where the closed-loop path
assumption cannot be guaranteed.
Most recently, cross-view matching methods based on deep
learning are proposed [28]–[30], which can estimate the global
position by matching the image of horizontal view (captured by
the camera on the land vehicle) to the satellite image directly.
Vehiclenavigationaidedbycross-viewmatchingis alsoreported
in [31], however the results show that the position error of this
method is high (over hundreds of meters) owing to the signiﬁcant
parallax between the images.
Geomagnetic matching is a positioning approach that utilizes
the real-time measured magnetic ﬁeld and reference magnetic
ﬁeld. It is an autonomous navigation approach, which can
provide global positioning solution. However, the application
of geomagnetic matching in positioning, especially in vehi-
cle positioning, has the following problems. First of all, the
reference geomagnetic ﬁeld [32], [33] used in matching has
limitedaccuracy,whichﬁnallyresultsinlargepositioningerrors.
Furthermore, the geomagnetic ﬁeld can be easily disturbed by
artiﬁcial electromagnetic materials or even natural phenomenon,
such as the Sun magnetic storm, which will results in the
instability of the positioning accuracy [34].
In this paper, we proposed an approach to solve the au-
tonomous navigation problem of land vehicle under open envi-
ronments. In this proposed approach, vision-based positioning
technique is used to aid the INS/odometer integration by using
a dual-rate Kalman ﬁlter. A UAV is used to carry the vision
camera and helps to realize the positioning of the vehicle by
image matching. The position obtained from UAV vision, INS,
and the odometer velocity are integrated by using a dual-rate
Kalman ﬁlter. By using this proposed navigation scheme, the
autonomous navigation of the land vehicle can be continuously
achieved without using the GNSS aiding.
Compared with SLAM, the proposed method can achieve
high precision global position under open environments without
loop-path. In addition, the aerial image matching technique
(employed in the proposed method) is much more precise and
reliable (reported in the experimental part) than cross-view
matching and geomagnetic matching.
Our method is proposed for the vehicle navigation of critical
missions in open environments. Such missions are so important
thatmustbeaccomplishedeveniftheGPSislong-termlydenied.
The main contribution of the proposed approach can be
summarized as follows. (1) The accumulated position error
of INS/Odometer is corrected by image matching rather than
relying on GNSS or closed-loop optimization as SLAM does.
Therefore, the proposed approach can provide continuous and
reliable autonomous navigation information for land vehicle in
open environment, even under the GNSS denied circumstances.
(2) Considering the problems of low matching frequency and
mismatching rate of image matching technique, Kalman ﬁlter is
used to realize the integration of position from the UAV vision,
the velocity from the odometer and navigation information from
INS. (3) Considering the different update frequency, a dual-rate
Kalman ﬁltering method is used to integrate the information
of INS, vision and odometer to obtain a reliable and robust
integrated navigation results.
Fig. 1.
Vehicle position estimation based on image matching.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: The
vehicle positioning method based on UAV vision is proposed
in Section II. Section III introduces an optimal fusion algorithm
integrating INS, Odometer and UAV vision. Section IV ana-
lyzes the simulation results and the experimental test results are
presented in Section V. Concluding remarks are presented in
Section VI.
II. VISION POSITIONING FOR LAND VEHICLE BASED ON
IMAGE MATCHING
The main idea of obtaining the land vehicle position by using
UAV vision is shown in Fig. 1. The real-time image is captured
by a UAV at the height about 200∼300 meters. The cover area of
the real-time image must be large enough to include many stable
landform features, so the matching result won’t be affected by
the environment changes in short-term, or small disguised land
objects. The vehicle must be contained in the real-time image.
The position of the vehicle can be calculated by registering the
real-time image with the referenced image with coordinates.
A. Fast Multi-Sensor Image Matching Based on CFOG
Since the referenced image is an optical satellite image, while
the real-time image is capture by a visible light camera (in
daylight) or an infrared camera (in night), the image Matching
method must be able to handle the multi-sensor image matching
problem. In addition, due to the real-time processing demand
and the limited computing resource on the UAV platform, the
image Matching method must be highly efﬁcient. Therefore, we
developed the image Matching method based on the channel
features of orientated gradients (CFOG) descriptors [35], which
is designed for multi-sensor image matching and it can be
accelerated with fast Fourier transform (FFT).
Histogram of oriented gradient (HOG) is a well-known de-
scriptor which captures the structure feature of image based
on local gradient and orientation. HOG can adapt to nonlinear
intensity variations between images and it can be successfully
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
DONG et al.: UAV VISION AIDED INS/ODOMETER INTEGRATION FOR LAND VEHICLE AUTONOMOUS NAVIGATION
4827
Fig. 2.
Example of gradient reversal.
applied to multimodal matching [36], [37]. CFOG is an exten-
sion of the HOG descriptor, which out performs HOG in both
matching performance and computational efﬁciency. Compared
with HOG, three improvements are made in CFOG.
1) A 3-D Gaussian kernel ﬁlter is developed for smoothing
the descriptor in X- and Y-directions and between the ori-
entation channels (each channel contains the orientation
calculated form different scale). This process can reduce
the inﬂuence of orientation distortions caused by noise
distortion between images.
2) Gradients with direction in [180◦, 360◦) are transferto
[0◦, 180◦) to address the gradient reversal caused by inten-
sityinversionbetweenmultimodalimages.Fig.2showsan
exampleofgradientreversal.Thearrowsshowthegradient
orientation from the brighter areas to the darker areas.
3) The searching process (which is the main time-consuming
part of template matching) is performed in frequency do-
main with accelerate technique based on FFT. Therefore,
the efﬁciency is signiﬁcantly improvement.
The method originally proposed in [35] is based on feature
point area matching. The CFOG descriptor is extracted from
the small area around the feature point. This method is a ﬁne
image registration approach which assumes the two images are
approximately matched. Therefore, this method can’t match two
images with large deviation.
In our application, the deviation between the real-time image
and the referenced image could be very large because of the
accumulated position error. In this case, the real-time image
must be searched in a very large area in the reference image
for matching the right position. Therefore, we re-designed the
CFOG image registration method for matching image with large
deviation. Fig. 3 shows the ﬂow chart of the re-designed image
method.
The real-time image is corrected according to the altitude
and pose information of UAV. After the correction, the real-
time image is warped to an ortho-image which has the same
orientation and ground resolution with the referenced image.
The searching area is selected from the reference image
according to the range of position error. Since there is mainly
translation deviation between the corrected real-time image and
the referenced image, a template matching with translation
searching is employed for matching the position. The CFOG
descriptor is extracted for each pixel of the real-time image and
each pixel of the searching area of the reference image. Then,
Fig. 3.
Matching the real-time image with the reference image.
sum of squared differences(SSD) is employed to compare the
template with each candidate window in the search area, and
the searching process is accelerated with FFT. After the fast
template matching, the most translation deviation is removed,
therefore we can employ the ﬁne registration method based on
CFOG [35] to calculate the ﬁnal matching results.
B. Vehicle Location in Real-Time Image
To calculate the global position of the vehicle, we must locate
the vehicle in the real-time image ﬁrst, as shown in Fig. 1. The
template and the features of the speciﬁc vehicle can be prepared
beforethelocationtask.naddition,uniquearrangementofmarks
or lights can be placed on the top of the vehicle if there are
multiplecarswithidenticalorsimilarphysicalappearance.Since
the size of the vehicle and the altitude and the pose of the UAV
are known, we can generate a template of this vehicle with the
same resolution and the same direction with the vehicle in the
real-time image. Therefore, this location task can be completed
with a straightforward template matching processing.
For reliable locating the vehicle, noticeable feature marks
are added on the upside surface of the vehicle in daylight. In
case of night, infrared mark lamps are added in the upside
surface of the of the vehicle. Two templates are prepared, one
is cut from the image which is captured by the visible light
camera, and one is cut from the image which is captured by
the infrared light camera. Since the template and the real-time
image are captured in different time, there may be light change
or gain variation between them. Therefore, we employ the NCC
similarity measurement [38] to search the vehicle template in
the real-time image. NCC is a relabel similarity measurement
in case of light change or gain variation because it’s invariant to
linear gray change [39]. The ﬂow chart of the vehicle location
in real-time image is given in Fig. 4.
III. UAV VISION POSITIONING AIDED INS/ODOMETER
INTEGRATED NAVIGATION
A. Integration Scheme
The schematic diagram of the proposed UAV aided
INS/Odometer data fusion mechanism is shown in Fig. 5. The
INS, odometer system and UAV vision positioning system input
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
4828
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2022
Fig. 4.
Vehicle location in real-time image.
Fig. 5.
UAV Vision Positioning Aided INS/Odometer Integration Schematics.
different navigation information into the data fusion mechanism.
The data fusion mechanism estimates the navigation errors and
returns the estimated errors back to the INS and odometer sys-
tem. At the same time, the integrated positioning information is
input into the UAV vision positioning system as image matching
aiding information.
It should be noted that the odometer velocity and the UAV
positioning information are both used as the references of the
data fusion mechanism. However, the data rates of the odometer
velocity and the UAV positioning information are quite different
because of their different working mechanisms. The data rate of
the odometer velocity is strictly 400Hz in our data processing
realization, and the data rate of the UAV positioning is quite
slow and determined by the successful image matching period
which is irregular and generally takes several seconds. It can be
found from the above analysis that the two reference sources
for the data fusion are unsynchronized and have quite different
date rates. So, the common EKF is difﬁcult to integrate the
information. Thus, in this paper, a new ﬁlter structure, dual-rate
Kalman Filter, is used to integrate data described above. Fig. 6
illustrates the dual-rate Kalman Filtering scheme.
Filter A in Fig. 6 is used to integrate the INS and odometer
data. Measurement from the odometer could be converted into
the velocity of the vehicle by using the reference attitude cal-
culated by the INS. The calculated odometer velocity is used
as reference velocity of Filter A and is compared with the
INS velocity for obtaining the observation of the Filter A. This
observation is used to estimate the errors of the INS, the drifts
of the inertial sensors and the error parameters of the odometer,
Fig. 6.
Kalman Filtering Scheme for UAV Vision Positioning Aided
INS/Odometer Integration.
which are then returned to the INS and odometer system to
correct the errors.
Filter B in Fig. 6 is used to integrate the INS and UAV vision
positioning information. The UAV positioning information for
the vehicle is used as reference position of Filter B and is
compared with the INS position for obtaining the observation of
the Filter B. This observation is used to estimate and correct
the position errors of the INS. It should be noted that the
UAV vision positioning technique uses the position from the
integrated navigation as a constraint for image searching and
matching, which can dramatically reduce the image searching
time burden.
To implement the Kalman Filtering shown in Fig. 6, the
system equation and the measurement equation should be for-
mulated as follows [40], [41]:
˙X = FX + U
(1)
Z = HX + W
(2)
Equation (1) is the system equation describing changing rule
of the system state variables X, whereUis the process noise
vector, and F is the system matrix. Equation (2) is the measure-
ment equation describing relation between observation variable
Z and state variable X, where W is the measurement noise
vector and H is the measurement matrix. The main work of the
remaining part of the section is to formulate the system equation
and measurement equation discussed above.
B. System Error Dynamics for Integration
The system equation of Kalman Filtering Scheme shown in
Fig. 6 is based on the INS error equations. The psi-angle error
equations of INS are as follows [42]:
⎧
⎨
⎩
δ˙rn = δvn −ωn
en × δrn
δ ˙vn = −(ωn
in + ωn
ie) × δvn −ψn × f n + Cn
b∇b
˙ψn = −ωn
in × ψn + Cn
bεb
(3)
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
DONG et al.: UAV VISION AIDED INS/ODOMETER INTEGRATION FOR LAND VEHICLE AUTONOMOUS NAVIGATION
4829
In the above equations, the symbols at the superscript or
subscript denote coordinate frames. The names of the coordi-
nate frames are listed as follows and the detailed deﬁnitions
can be found in the literature [42]. Symbols i, e, n, b represent
inertial frame, earth frame, navigation frame, and body frame,
respectively. Especially, the angular rate vector, such as ωn
in with
the subscript in, represents the rotation angular rate of n frame
with respect to i frame.
In (3), δrn, δvn, ψnrepresent position error vector, velocity
error vector, and attitude error vector projected in n frame, re-
spectively. And speciﬁc force measured by accelerator projected
in n frame is denoted as f n. The angular rate vector in (3)
are expressed asωc
ab, which denotes the angular rate of b frame
with respect to a frame projected in c frame. For example, ωn
in
represents the angular rate of nframe with respect to iframe
projected in n frame.∇b, εbare the accelerometer bias vector
and the gyro bias vector projected in the body frame. The
transformation matrix from bframe to nframe is deﬁned as Cn
b .
The accelerometer bias vector∇b and the gyro bias vector
εbcould be extended as the state variable of the Kalman Filter.
Considering that ∇b, εb are approximately constant, so their
differentials could be showed as:
 ˙∇b = 0
˙εb = 0
(4)
Insert (4) into (3), the error equation of INS can be expressed
as follows:
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
δ˙rn = δvn −ωn
en × δrn
δ ˙vn = −(ωn
in + ωn
ie) × δvn −ψn × f n + Cn
b∇b
˙ψn = −ωn
in × ψn + Cn
bεb
˙∇b = 0
˙εb = 0
(5)
δKD, δαH, δαP are used to represent the scale factor error, the
heading installation error and the pitch installation error of the
odometer, which will be discussed in detail in Part C, Section III.
Then, deﬁne vector δd as follows.
δd = [δKD, δαH, δαP ]T
(6)
Similar to the accelerometer bias vector and the gyro bias vec-
tor, the differentials of the odometer’s error could be expressed
as follows:
δ ˙d = 0
(7)
Combining (7) and (3), the error equations of the INS could
be extended as follows.
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
δ˙rn = δvn −ωn
en × δrn
δ ˙vn = −(ωn
in + ωn
ie) × δvn −ψn × f n + Cn
b∇b
˙ψn = −ωn
in × ψn + Cn
bεb
˙∇b = 0
˙εb = 0
δ ˙d = 0
(8)
where the position error, velocity error, attitude error, the ac-
celerometer bias, the gyro bias and the odometer errors are all
included. The driving noise vectors of above error equations
can be deﬁned as ur, uv, uψ, u∇, uε, ud, which are the process
noise vectors of the error equation. Then, equation (8) can be
supplement as:
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
δ˙rn = δvn −ωn
en × δrn + ur
δ ˙vn = −(ωn
in + ωn
ie) × δvn −ψn × f n + Cn
b∇b + uv
˙ψn = −ωn
in × ψn + Cn
bεb + uψ
˙∇b = u∇
˙εb = uε
δ ˙d = ud
(9)
Based on equations (1) and (9), system state vectors X and
the process noise vectors U can be deﬁned as:
X =

δrn δvn ψn ∇n εn δd
T
(10)
U =

ur uv uψ u∇uε ud
T
(11)
And system matrix could be written as:
F =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
F11 F12
0
0
0 0
0
F22 F23 F24
0 0
0
0 F33
0 F35 0
0
0
0
0
0 0
0
0
0
0
0 0
0
0
0
0
0 0
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(12)
The non-zero matrix Fijin (12) could be denoted as follows,
where the subscript N/E/D represent the components projected
in navigation frame n.
F11 =
⎡
⎣
0
ωn
enD −ωn
enE
−ωn
enD
0
ωn
enN
ωn
enE
−ωn
enN
0
⎤
⎦
(13)
F12 =
⎡
⎣
1 0 0
0 1 0
0 0 1
⎤
⎦
(14)
F22 =
⎡
⎣
0
(2ωn
ieD + ωn
enD)
−(2ωn
ieE + ωn
enE)
−(2ωn
ieD + ωn
enD)
0
(2ωn
ieN + ωn
enN)
(2ωn
ieE + ωn
enE)
−(2ωn
ieN + ωn
enN)
0
⎤
⎦
(15)
F23 =
⎡
⎣
0
−f n
D
f n
E
f n
D
0
−f n
N
−f n
E f n
N
0
⎤
⎦
(16)
F24 = Cn
b
(17)
F33 =
⎡
⎣
0
ωn
inD −ωn
inE
−ωn
inD
0
ωn
inN
ωn
inE
−ωn
inN
0
⎤
⎦
(18)
F35 = −Cn
b
(19)
Equations (10), (11), and (12) deﬁne the system equation of
Kalman Filter given in equation (1), where the system state
vectors X is deﬁned in equation (10), the process noise vectors
U is deﬁned in equation (11) and the system matrixF is deﬁned
in equation (12).
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
4830
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2022
C. Measurement Model Based on Odometer Observations
In this section, the measurement equation of Filter A will be
derived from the measurement equation of the odometer. Herein,
symbolmisusedtorepresentthemeasurementcoordinateframe
of the odometer, which will be coincident with b frame in ideal
situation. However, because of installation errors between the
odometer and INS, the m frame and b frame are different with
roll,pitch,andheadinginstallationangles,whicharerepresented
as αR, αP , αH respectively.
According to the previous deﬁnition, the land vehicle’s veloc-
ity in m frame can be written as follows:
Vm
D =
⎡
⎣
vD
0
0
⎤
⎦=
⎡
⎣
KDPD
0
0
⎤
⎦
(20)
where Vm
D is the velocity vector from odometer projected in m
frame, vD is the scalar velocity from odometer, KD is the scale
factor of the odometer, and PD is the original pulse output of
the odometer.
In b frame, the odometer velocity vector could be expressed
as:
Vb
D= Cb
mVm
D
(21)
whereVb
D is the velocity vector from odometer projected in b
frame, and Cb
m denotes the transformation matrix from m frame
to b frame, which can be expressed according to the roll, pitch,
and heading installation angles αR, αP , αH as follows:
Cb
m =
⎡
⎣
cos αP cos αH −cos αR sin αH + sin αR sin αP cos αH
cos αP sin αH
cos αR cos αH + sin αR sin αP sin αH
−sin αP
sin αR cos αP
sin αR sin αH + cos αR sin αP cos αH
−sin αR cos αH + cos αR sin αP sin αH
cos αR cos αP
⎤
⎦
(22)
Insert (20) and (22) into (21), the following equivalent form
can be obtained:
Vb
D =
⎡
⎣
cos αP cos αH
cos αP sin αH
−sin αP
⎤
⎦KDPD
(23)
From equation (23), it can be noted that the velocity vector
Vb
D is relevant to the installation angles αP , αH and will not be
affected by the roll installation angle αR. The installation angles
αP , αH and the scale factor KD could be calibrated through the
vehicle’s driving for certain distance with known path.
Deﬁne symbols δαP , δαH, δKDare the residual errors of
αP , αH, KD after calibration. By taking perturbation analysis
[42] to equation (23), the error vector of Vb
D could be expressed
as follows.
δVb
D =
⎡
⎣
δKD
δαH
−δαP
⎤
⎦KDPD
(24)
Based on equation (24), the measurement model of the Filter
A in Fig. 6 will be derived in the following part.
Deﬁne symbol Z as the observation of Filter A as follows.
Z = ˆVn−ˆV
n
D
(25)
where ˆVn denotes the INS measured vehicle velocity projected
in n frame with error δVn, and ˆVn
Ddenotes the odometer mea-
sured vehicle velocity projected in n frame with error δVn
D. So
the following relationship holds.
ˆVn = Vn+δVn
(26)
ˆVn
D= Vn
D+δVn
D
(27)
Both Vn and Vn
Drepresent the real velocity of the vehicle
without errors, so they are equal.
Vn= Vn
D
(28)
Insert equations (26), (27), and (28) into equation (25), the
following equation can be obtained:
Z = δVn −δVn
D
(29)
where δVn is the INS velocity error deﬁned in equation (3), and
δVn
D can be derived as follows.
According to the above discussion, Vn
D is the odometer
measured vehicle velocity projected in n frame, and it has the
following relationship with the previously deﬁned Vb
D.
Vn
D= Cn
bVb
D
(30)
By taking perturbation analysis [42] to equation (30), the
velocity error vector δVn
D could be expressed as follows.
δVn
D = δCn
bVb
D + Cn
bδVb
D
(31)
where the error matrix δCn
bof the attitude matrix Cn
bcan be
denoted as follows [43]:
δCn
b= −(ψn×) Cn
b
(32)
where ψ is the INS attitude error deﬁned in equation (3), and
(ψ×) denotes the asymmetric matrix of vector ψ [43].
Insert (32) into (31), and the following relationship holds:
δVn
D = −(ψn×) Cn
bVb
D + Cn
bδVb
D
(33)
where the relationship Cn
bVb
D= Vn
D = Vn holds according to
equation (28). Finally, the following formula can be derived as
follows:
δVn
D = Vn × ψn + Cn
bδVb
D
(34)
According to (24), Cn
bδVb
D in (34) could be showed as:
Cn
bδVb
D= Cn
b
⎡
⎣
δKD
δαH
−δαP
⎤
⎦KDPD
(35)
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.7]
DONG et al.: UAV VISION AIDED INS/ODOMETER INTEGRATION FOR LAND VEHICLE AUTONOMOUS NAVIGATION
4831
Deﬁne symbolIA as follows:
IA =
⎡
⎣
1 0 0
0 1 0
0 0 −1
⎤
⎦
(36)
Insert equation (36) into (35), and the following relationship
holds:
Cn
bδVb
D = (KDPD) Cn
bIAδd
(37)
where δd is the error vector of the odometer deﬁned in equation
(6). Insert equation (37) into (34), and δVn
D can be expressed
as:
δVn
D = (Vn×) ψn + (KDPD) Cn
bIAδd
(38)
Inserting equation (38) into (29) can obtain the measurement
equation of the Filter A.
ZA= δVn −(Vn×) ψn −(KDPD) Cn
bIAδd
(39)
This measurement equation shows the relationship between
the observation vector ZA of Filter A and system state vector
X. Deﬁne the velocity measurement noises of the odometer as
wvA, measurement equation (39) can be rewritten as:
ZA= δVn −(Vn×) ψn −(KDPD) Cn
bIAδd + wvA (40)
Considering the standard measurement model of Kalman
Filter shown in equation (2), the observation vector Zand the
measurement noise vector Wof Filter A can be expressed as
follows:
Z = ZA
(41)
W = wvA
(42)
According to equation (40), the measurement matrix H in
equation (2) can be rewritten as HA which can be expressed as
follows:
HA =

0 HA1 HA2 0 0 HA3

(43)
The null matrices in equation (43) are all three dimensional,
and the non-zero matrix Hi could be denoted respectively as
follows:
HA1 =
⎡
⎣
1 0 0
0 1 0
0 0 1
⎤
⎦
(44)
HA2 =
⎡
⎣
0
VD −VE
−VD
0
VN
VE −VN
0
⎤
⎦
(45)
HA3 =
⎡
⎣
−C11KDPD −C12KDPD C13KDPD
−C21KDPD −C22KDPD C23KDPD
−C31KDPD −C32KDPD C33KDPD
⎤
⎦
(46)
Equations (41), (42), and (43) have deﬁned the observation
equation in the Filter A. The observation vector Z is deﬁned
in equation (41), the measurement noise vectorW is deﬁned
in equation (42) and the measurement matrix H is deﬁned in
equation (43).
D. Measurement Model Based on UAV Vision Positioning
In this section, the measurement equation of Filter B will be
derived according to the UAV vision positioning measurement.
The measurement equation of the UAV vision positioning can
be expressed as follows:
ˆPV= P+Wp
(47)
whereˆPV is the UAV vision positioning result which is consist
of the real position P of the vehicle and the measurement noises
Wp.
ˆPV, P, Wp can be expressed as follows:
ˆPV =
 ˆλv ˆLv ˆhv
T
P =
 λ L h T
WP =

Wλ WL Wh
T
(48)
where ˆλv, ˆLv, ˆhv represent the latitude, longitude, and height
of the UAV vision positioning, and λ, L, h represent the real
latitude, longitude, and height of the vehicle, and Wλ, WL, Wh
represent the measurement noises of the latitude, longitude, and
altitude respectively.
Deﬁne the INS calculated position as ˆP, and it can be ex-
pressed as:
ˆP = P + δP
(49)
where P is the real position of the vehicle, and δP is the INS
positioning error.
ˆP, P, δPcan be written as follows:
ˆP =
 ˆλ ˆL ˆh
T
P =

λ L h
T
δP =

δλ δL δh
T
(50)
where ˆλ, ˆL, ˆh represent the latitude, longitude, and height of
the INS positioning, and λ, L, h represent the real latitude,
longitude, and height of the vehicle, and δλ, δL, δh represent
the measurement errors of the latitude, longitude, and altitude
respectively.
In (47) and (49), both the position and position error are ex-
pressed by latitude, longitude and altitude. However, the position
error in equation (3) is calculated in earth frame and projected
in n frame [42]. So, herein, the equations (47) and (49) should
be transformed into earth frame ﬁrst, and can be expressed as
follows.
ˆre
v = re+we
r
(51)
ˆre = re+δre
(52)
where e represents the earth frame which is ﬁxed in the earth
and with the origin in the center of the earth, and ˆre
v is the UAV
vision positioning result which is consist of the real position re
of the vehicle and the measurement noises we
r, and ˆre is real
position of the vehicle, and δre is the INS positioning error. It
should be noted that all the vectors in equations (51) and (52)
are calculated in e frame and projected in n frame.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.8]
4832
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2022
Fig. 7.
Moving Trajectory for Simulation.
The system observation vector Ze
B of the Filter B in e frame
can be written as:
Ze
B = ˆre −ˆre
v = δre −we
r
(53)
Equation (53) can be projected from e frame to n frame, and
can be expressed as follows.
ZB= Cn
eδre + Cn
e (−we
r)
(54)
Equation (54) can be transformed to be the form as follows:
ZB = δrn + wrB
(55)
Comparing equations (2) and (55), the observation vector Z
and the measurement noise Wof Filter B can be written as
follows:
Z = ZB
(56)
W = wrB
(57)
Based on equations (2) and (55), the measurement matrix of
the Filter B can be written as follows:
HB =
 HB1 0 0 0 0 0
(58)
The null matrices in (58) are all three-dimensional, and non-
zero matrix HB1 is a unit matrix:
HB1 =
⎡
⎣
1 0 0
0 1 0
0 0 1
⎤
⎦
(59)
Equations (56), (57), and (58) deﬁne the observation equation
of the Filter B, where the observation vector Z is deﬁned in
(56), the measurement noise vectorW is deﬁned in (57), and the
measurement matrix HB is deﬁned in equation (58).
IV. SIMULATION ANALYSIS
A. INS/Odometer Integration Simulation
1) Simulation Conditions: The vehicle trajectory during the
simulation is shown in Fig. 7, where several maneuvers were
set during the simulation to stimulate the errors of the inertial
sensors [44].
TABLE I
ERROR PARAMETERS OF THE SIMULATED SENSORS
Fig. 8.
Positioning Error of INS/Odometer Integration.
The main equipment in the simulation is an inertial navigation
system and an electronic odometer. The sensor parameters in the
simulation are shown in Table I.
During the simulation, the inertial navigation system uses a
typical navigation-grade equipment, in which the bias stability
of the gyro is better than 0.01 deg/h and the bias stability of
the accelerometer is better than 50ug. Navigation-grade inertial
navigation systems are widely used in scenarios such as sur-
veying and mapping vehicles and military launch vehicles. The
overall measurement error of the odometer is 0.1% D, where D
represents the total mileage of the vehicle. Odometers with this
accuracy are also widely used in scenarios such as the above
surveying and mapping vehicles and military launch vehicles.
2) Simulation Results: The simulation time of the trajectory
shown in Fig. 7 is 3600 seconds, and the corresponding driving
distance of the vehicle is about 64 km. In the ﬁrst 400s of the
simulation, the vehicle was stationary for the initial alignment
of the inertial navigation system.
The errors of INS/odometer integrated navigation are shown
from Figs. 8 to 10. Fig. 8 shows the positioning error of
INS/odometer integrated navigation. It can be seen from Fig. 8
that during the navigation process, the peak values of latitude
error and longitude error reached 40 m and −34 m respectively.
Fig. 9 shows the velocity error of INS/odometer integrated
navigation. It can be seen from Fig. 9 that the north velocity
error and the east velocity error peak value reached 0.09 m/s
and −0.075 m/s respectively.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.9]
DONG et al.: UAV VISION AIDED INS/ODOMETER INTEGRATION FOR LAND VEHICLE AUTONOMOUS NAVIGATION
4833
Fig. 9.
Velocity Error of INS/Odometer Integration.
Fig. 10.
Gyro Biases Estimation of INS/Odometer Integration.
Fig. 10 shows the gyro biases estimation during the
INS/odometer integrated navigation. Comparing the simulation
conditions of the gyro biases in Fig. 10 and Table I, it can be
found that under this motion trajectory, the estimated values
of the gyro biases can converge to the correct value. This is
mainly due to the maneuvers in the simulation trajectory during
the integrated navigation process, which makes the gyro biases
observable [45]. Under the conditions that the gyro biases are
observable, the positioning error and velocity error of the system
are signiﬁcantly improved as shown in Figs. 8 and 9. However,
due to the lack of absolute position correction, the error of the
integrated navigation system especially positioning error will
continue to accumulate with time.
B. INS/SLAM Integration Simulation
1) Simulation Conditions: For the convenience of compari-
son, the simulation trajectory for INS/SLAM Integration is set
the same as INS/Odometer integration shown in Fig. 7. The
inertial sensor parameters are also set the same as shown in
Table I.
The positioning error of SLAM is set to be 1%D under the
circumstances that closed-loop optimization is unavailable for
land vehicle in outdoor scenarios [25]–[27], where D represents
the total mileage of the vehicle.
Fig. 11.
Positioning Error of INS/SLAM Integration.
Fig. 12.
Velocity Error of INS/SLAM Integration.
Fig. 13.
Gyro Biases Estimation of INS/SLAM Integration.
2) Simulation Results: The errors of INS/SLAM integrated
navigation are shown from Figs. 11 to 13. Fig. 11 shows the
positioning error of INS/SLAM integrated navigation. It can be
seen from Fig. 11 that during the navigation process, the peak
values of latitude error and longitude error were about 150 m
and 75 m respectively.
Fig. 12 shows the velocity error of INS/SLAM integrated
navigation. It can be seen from Fig. 12 that the north velocity
error and the east velocity error peak value reached 0.25 m/s and
−0.14 m/s respectively.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.10]
4834
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2022
Fig. 13 shows the gyro bias estimation during the INS/SLAM
integrated navigation. The estimated values of the gyro biases
were also convergent, however, the converted values were a little
deviated from the true values, which was introduced by the
larger observation errors arising from the SLAM positioning.
After the convergence of the gyro biases, the positioning error
and velocity error of the system are signiﬁcantly improved as
shown in Figs. 11 and 12. However, due to the lack of absolute
position correction, the error of the integrated navigation system
especially positioning error will continue to accumulate with
time.
C. UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Integration Simulation
1) Simulation Conditions: For the convenience of com-
parison, the simulation trajectory for UAV Vision Aided
INS/Odometer Integration is set the same as INS/Odometer
Integration shown in Fig. 7. The inertial sensor parameters are
also set the same as shown in Table I.
The difference of this subsection with Section A of Section IV
is that the UAV Vision is used to aid the INS/Odometer Inte-
gration in this simulation. The positioning error of the visual
positioning is set to be within 2 meters with random noises. The
positioning error setting takes into account the reference map
error in the matching positioning, the attitude error of the UAV
and the matching error.
To evaluate the inﬂuence of different visual positioning fre-
quencies, the periodic updates of visual position and the ape-
riodic updates of visual position are both simulated to aid the
INS/Odometer Integration system.
2) Simulation Results for Periodic Visual Position Updates:
Generally, the visual positioning computation can be completed
in the period of no more than several seconds. But actually,
during the integration process, we don’t need so high update
frequency because of the high accuracy of the INS used. So,
herein, two situations are simulated. In the ﬁrst situation, the
visual positioning period is set to be two minutes, and in the
second situation, the visual positioning period is set to be ﬁve
minutes. The performances of the integrated navigation system
for these two situations will be simulated and evaluated.
For the two minutes visual positioning period situation, the
errors of the integrated system are shown from Figs. 14 to 16.
Fig. 14 shows the positioning error of the integrated system.
It can be seen from Fig. 14 that during the navigation process,
the peak values of latitude error and longitude error are both
within the scope of 1 m. Obviously, due to the introduction of
the absolute position correction from vision, the position error
of the integrated system is constrained in a small range and does
not diverge with time.
Fig. 15 shows the velocity error of the integrated system. It can
be seen from Fig. 15 that during the navigation process, the north
velocity error and the east velocity error are both constrained
within the scope of 0.01 m/s.
Fig. 16 shows the gyro biases estimation of the integrated
system. Obviously, the gyro biases also converge to the correct
values. The reason is the same as the INS/odometer integrated
navigation.
Fig. 14.
Positioning Error of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Integration
with Two Minutes Visual Positioning Period.
Fig. 15.
Velocity Error of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Integration with
Two Minutes Visual Positioning Period.
Fig. 16.
Gyro Biases Estimation of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Inte-
gration with Two Minutes Visual Positioning Period.
For the Five minutes visual positioning period situation, the
errors of the integrated system are shown from Figs. 17 to 19.
Fig. 17 shows the positioning error of the integrated system. It
can be seen from Fig. 17 that during the navigation process, the
peak values of latitude error and longitude error were about 5 m
and 2 m respectively.
Fig. 18 shows the velocity error of the integrated system. It can
be seen from Fig. 18 that during the navigation process, the north
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.11]
DONG et al.: UAV VISION AIDED INS/ODOMETER INTEGRATION FOR LAND VEHICLE AUTONOMOUS NAVIGATION
4835
Fig. 17.
Positioning Error of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Integration
with Five Minutes Visual Positioning Period.
Fig. 18.
Velocity Error of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Integration with
Five Minutes Visual Positioning Period.
Fig. 19.
Gyro Biases Estimation of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Inte-
gration with Five Minutes Visual Positioning Period.
velocity error and the east velocity error are both constrained
within the scope of 0.015 m/s.
Fig. 19 shows the gyro biases estimation of the integrated
system. Because the observation interval from visual positioning
is too long, the gyro biases converge slowly and a little deviate
from the true values.
3) Simulation Results for Aperiodic Visual Position Updates:
In the actual application, the visual positioning frequency will
Fig. 20.
Positioning Error of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Integration
with Aperiodic Visual Positioning Period.
Fig. 21.
Velocity Error of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Integration with
Aperiodic Visual Positioning Period.
TABLE II
PARAMETERS OF THE CAMERAS
be apeiodic because of the actual image capturing and matching
procedure. So, thesimulationfor theaperiodicvisual positioning
is carried out herein, and the visual positioning intervals are
arranged to change from tens of seconds to two minutes.
The errors of the integrated system under aperiodic visual
positioning aiding are shown from Figs. 20 to 22. Fig. 20 shows
the positioning error of the integrated system. It can be seen
from Fig. 20 that during the navigation process, the peak values
of latitude error and longitude error are both within the scope of
1 m.
Fig. 21 shows the velocity error of the integrated system. It
can be seen from Fig. 21 that during the navigation process, the
north velocity error and the east velocity error are constrained
within 0.01 m/s.
Fig. 22 shows the gyro bias estimation of the integrated
system. Comparing the simulation conditions of the gyro biases
in Fig. 22 and Table I, it can be found that the estimated value
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.12]
4836
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2022
TABLE III
VISION POSITIONING RESULTS
Fig. 22.
Gyro Biases Estimation of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Inte-
gration with Aperiodic Visual Positioning Period.
of gyro biases also converge to the correct values. The reason
is the same as the INS/odometer integrated navigation. Under
the condition that the gyro biases are observable, the positioning
error and velocity error of the system are signiﬁcantly improved,
as shown in Figs. 20 and 21. At the same time, due to the
introduction of the absolute position correction from vision, the
position error of the navigation system is also constrained in a
small range and does not diverge with time.
V. EXPERIMENTAL TESTS
A. Field Tests of Vision Positioning
The land vehicle vision positioning method is evaluated by
a ﬁeld test. In this test, a visible light camera and an infrared
camera are carried by a UAV (Model: DJI Martice 600Pro) to
capture the real-time aerial image.
The resolution and the ﬁeld of view of the camera are provided
in Table II. The ground resolution of the real-time image can be
estimated according to the camera parameters and the operating
height shown in Table II. The referenced image is captured from
Google Earth. After double the resolution with oversampling,
the ground resolution of the referenced image is 0.3 meter/pixel.
Both the infrared and visible light real-time images will be
warped to the ortho-images with the same ground resolution
as the referenced image.
The test results are given in Table III. The accuracy of the
vision positioning is evaluated by comparing it with the GPS
RTK positioning, where the GPS antenna is mounted on the
center of the vehicle. The RTK positioning accuracy is about
0.02 m in this experiment, in which the GPS base station located
at the distance no more than 10 kilometers from the test ﬁeld.
According to Table III, the peak value of the proposed vision
positioning error is 2.23 meters in our tests, and the standard
deviation of the positioning errors is 1.52 meters. According
to the approach presented in Section II, the vision positioning
errors mainly arise from the following two sources.
1) Error of image matching. Since the referenced image,
the real-time image, and the template of the vehicle are
captured in different time, there will be small landscapes
changes or object variations among them, which will
introduce errors to the matching results. In our tests, the
standard error of image matching is about 1∼2pixels. The
standard error of vehicle location in real-time image is
less than 1 pixel. According to the ground resolution of
referenced image (0.3 meter/pixel), the standard error of
positioning introduced by image matching is less than1
meter.
2) Error of referenced images. The accuracy of the referenced
images is also limited. In our tests, the standard error of
the coordinates of the referenced images is about 1 meter.
The two types of errors are additive because they are inde-
pendent to each other. Therefore, the analysis is conﬁrmed by
the positioning error of the results. Fig. 23 shows examples of
the vision positioning testing.
B. Field Tests of UAV Vision Positioning Aided INS/Odometer
Integration
We designed a ﬁeld test to evaluate the performance of
UAV vision positioning aided INS/odometer integration. The
integrated navigation system is mainly composed of two parts:
the air part and the ground part.
The air part includes a six-rotor UAV, camera and airborne
computing platform. The performance parameters are shown
in Table II. The ground part includes a ring laser gyro inertial
navigation system (RLG INS) and an odometer system. The
performance parameters of the RLG INS and the odometer
are shown in Table IV. In addition, a high-precision RLG INS
and GPS integrated navigation system was used as reference to
evaluate the position, velocity and attitude accuracy of the tested
system. The performance parameters of the reference RLG INS
and GPS integrated navigation equipment are shown in Table V.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.13]
DONG et al.: UAV VISION AIDED INS/ODOMETER INTEGRATION FOR LAND VEHICLE AUTONOMOUS NAVIGATION
4837
Fig. 23.
Examples of Vision Positioning results.
TABLE IV
TESTED RLG INS AND ODOMETER PARAMETERS
TABLE V
REFERENCE RLG INS/GPS PARAMETERS
The equipment used in the test is shown in Fig. 24. The camera
and image positioning calculation computer are installed on
the six-rotor UAV. The experimental RLG inertial navigation
is installed in the trunk of the vehicle. The odometer is installed
Fig. 24.
Experimental Scenario.
at the bottom of the vehicle and connected to the rotation axis
of the vehicle. The camera positioning result is sent to the wire-
less communication module installed in the inertial navigation
system through the wireless communication module, and the
odometer data is sent to the inertial navigation system in the
form of TTL pulses. The navigation computer in the inertial
navigation system assists the integration of inertial navigation
data, odometer data and camera positioning data. The reference
RLG INS/GPS is also installed in the trunk, and the GPS antenna
is installed at the top of the rear of the vehicle. The time
synchronization between the experimental RLG INS computer
and the reference RLG INS computer is through TTL pulses.
Three vehicle experiments were carried out, each of which
lasted about 1 hour. Taking the position, velocity and attitude
results of the reference RLG INS/GPS integration system as
reference, the attitude and heading errors, the velocity errors
and the position errors of the UAV vision aided INS/Odometer
integration are shown in Figs. 25, 26 and 27 respectively. The
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.14]
4838
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2022
Fig. 25.
Attitude and Heading Errors of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer
Integration for Field Tests. (a)Roll Errors. (b) Pitch Errors. (c) Heading Errors.
TABLE VI
NAVIGATION ERRORS STATISTICS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEM FOR FIELD TESTS
Fig. 26.
Velocity Errors of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Integration for
Field Tests. (a) North Velocity Errors. (b)East Velocity Errors.
Fig. 27.
Position Errors of UAV Vision Aided INS/Odometer Integration for
Field Tests. (a) Latitude Errors. (b) Longitude Errors.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.15]
DONG et al.: UAV VISION AIDED INS/ODOMETER INTEGRATION FOR LAND VEHICLE AUTONOMOUS NAVIGATION
4839
Fig. 28.
Position Errors of common INS/Odometer Integration for Field Tests.
(a) Latitude Errors. (b) Longitude Errors.
statistical results of the navigation errors are shown in Table VI.
As a comparison,
the position errors of the common
INS/Odometer integration are given in Fig. 28 by processing
the same dataset without the UAV vision aiding.
VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper proposes a UAV vision aided INS/odometer in-
tegration for land vehicle autonomous navigation. The main
innovations are as follows:
1) In this paper, a land vehicle positioning method based
on image matching is proposed. During the positioning
process, the UAV carries a camera to take pictures from the
air to the land. By matching the real-time images taken by
thecamerawiththereferenceimage,thevisualpositioning
of the land vehicle is realized.
2) An integrated navigation scheme based on UAV vision
positioning information, INS and odometer was proposed,
and the above-mentioned information was integrated by
dual-rate Kalman Filtering.
Throughsimulationandexperiment,theaccuracyandreliabil-
ity of the proposed autonomous navigation method are veriﬁed
to meet the autonomous navigation requirements of the land
vehicles.
There are still some limits about the proposed approach.
First, the proposed method will not work when face some
challenge weather. The camera can’t adapt to heavy rain, cloud
or fog occlusion, also the UAV platform can’t ﬂight in heavy
rain or storm wind. Second, the image matching technique
is not reliable for area with unstable landform features, such
as desert. Third, the proposed approach relies on the image
matching to provide the global position. Therefore, it can’t
adapt to UAV-denied situations, such as under a bridge, tunnel,
or other shielding circumstances.
Like other positioning approaches, the proposed method has
its limits. Actually, the navigation system of critical mission will
not entirely rely on one kind of position methods. The proposed
method can be worked as a supplementary method.
Currently, the UAV used for image matching and positioning
in this paper is currently carried out to take pictures through
manual control. As a part of future work, the UAV autonomous
take-off method based on automatic control and target recogni-
tion is under study.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Gu, Z. Xiang, Y. Zhang, and Q. Qian, “A multi-position joint particle
ﬁlter method for vehicle localization in urban area,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst., Madrid. Spain, Oct. 2018, pp. 656–662.
[2] E. Fraedrich, D. Heinrichs, F. J. Birke, and R. Cyganski, “Autonomous
driving, the built environment and policy implications,” Transp. Res. Part
A-Policy Pract., vol. 122, pp. 162–172, Apr. 2019.
[3] Z. Jiang and S. Raziei, “A probabilistic decision engine for navigation
of autonomous vehicles under uncertainty,” in Proc. IEEE Nat. Aerosp.
Electron. Conf., Dayton. OH, Jul. 2019, pp. 131–138.
[4] C. Liu, Z. Dai, Y. Zhao, J. Crowcroft, D. Wu, and K. Leung, “Distributed
and energy-efﬁcient mobile crowdsensing with charging stations by deep
reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 130–146, Jan. 2021.
[5] T. Li, H. Zhang, and Z. Gao, “Tight fusion of a monocular camera,
MEMS-IMU, and single-frequency Multi-GNSS RTK for precise naviga-
tion in GNSS-Challenged environments,” Remote Sensing, vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 610–634, Mar. 2019.
[6] I. Nygren and M. Jansson, “Terrain navigation using the correlator
method,” in Proc. IEEE Position Location Navigation Symp., Montere.
CA, Apr. 2004, pp. 649–657.
[7] H. Chen, Z. L. Zhang, and Z. F. Zhou, “SINS/OD integrated navigation
algorithm based on body frame position increment for land vehicles,”
Math. Problems Eng., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 23–34, 2018.
[8] S. C. Liu, D. Z. Zheng, and R. Li, “Compensation method for pipeline
centerline measurement of in-Line inspection during odometer slips based
on multi-sensor fusion and LSTM network,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 17,
pp. 3740–3758, Sep. 2019.
[9] J. Gao, K. Li, and Y. Chen, “Study on integration of FOG Single-axis
rotational INS and odometer for land vehicle,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 752–763, Jan. 2018.
[10] N. Vagle, A. Broumandan, and G. Lachapelle, “Multiantenna GNSS and
inertial sensors/odometer coupling for robust vehicular navigation,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 4816–4828, Dec. 2018.
[11] W. Ye, J. Li, J. Fang, and X. Yuan, “EGP-CDKF for performance improve-
ment of the SINS/GNSS integrated system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron.,
vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 3601–3609, Apr. 2018.
[12] Q.
Q.
Li,
Z.
P.
Chen,
Q.
W.
Hu,
and
L.
Zhang,
“Laser-
AidedINSandOdometerNavigation system for subway track irregularity
measurement,” J. Surveying Eng., vol. 143, no. 4, pp. 1–9, Nov. 2017.
[13] Y. Sun, G. Yang, Q. Cai, and S. Wang, “An On-line calibration method of
SINS/OdometerIntegrated navigation system,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf.
Sci. Control Eng., ChangSha, 2017, pp. 847–851.
[14] C. Yang, Y. Cai, C. Xin, H. Wang, and M. Shi, “Integrated navigation anal-
ysis for odometer-aided SINS,” in Proc. Chin. Automat. Congr., Hangzhou,
2019, pp. 830–833.
[15] W.Jia,X.Xiao,andZ.Deng,“Self-calibrationofINS/Odometerintegrated
system via kalman ﬁlter,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Intell.,
Nanjing, 2012, pp. 224–228.
[16] Y. Kim, J. An, and J. Lee, “Robust navigational system for a trans-
porter using GPS/INS fusion,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 65, no. 4,
pp. 3347–3354, Apr. 2018.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.16]
4840
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2022
[17] Y. Gu, L. T. Hsu, and S. Kamijo, “GNSS/Onboard inertial sensor integra-
tionwiththeaidof3-Dbuildingmapforlane-levelvehicleself-localization
in urban canyon,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 4274–4287,
Jun. 2016.
[18] H. J. Chu, G. J. Tsai, K. W. Chiang, and T. T. Duong, “GPS/MEMS INS
data fusion and map matching in urban areas,” Sensors, vol. 13, no. 9,
pp. 11280–11288, Sep. 2013.
[19] W. Li, X. Cui, and M. Lu, “A robust graph optimization realization
of tightly coupled GNSS/INS integrated navigation system for urban
vehicles,” Tsinghua Sci. Technol., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 724–732, 2018.
[20] W. Wen, X. Bai, Y.-C. Kan, and L.-T. Hsu, “Tightly coupled GNSS/INS
integration via factor graph and aided by Fish-eye camera,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 11, pp. 10651–10662, Nov. 2019.
[21] S. Zhao, Y. Chen, and J. A. Farrell, “High-precision vehicle navigation
in urban environments using an MEM’s IMU and single-frequency GPS
receiver,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 2854–2867,
Oct. 2016.
[22] V. Indelman, S. Williams, M. Kaess, and F. Dellaert, “Information fusion in
navigation systems via factor graph based incremental smoothing,” Robot.
Auton. Syst., vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 721–738, 2013.
[23] E. Choi and S. Chang, “A consumer tracking estimator for vehicles in
GPS-free environments,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 63, no. 4,
pp. 450–458, Nov. 2017.
[24] M. Jaradat and M. Abdel-Hafez, “Non-linear autoregressive delay-
dependent INS/GPS navigation system using neural networks,” IEEE
Sensors J., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1105–1115, Feb. 2017.
[25] R. Mur-Artal, J. M. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tardós, “ORB-SLAM: A
versatile and accurate monocular SLAM system,” IEEE Trans. Robot.,
vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1147–1163, Oct. 2015.
[26] T. Qin, P. Li, and S. Shen, “VINS-Mono: A robust and versatile monoc-
ular visual-inertial state estimator,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 34, no. 4,
pp. 1004–1020, Aug. 2018.
[27] R. Mur-Artal and J. D. Tardós, “ORB-SLAM2: An open-source SLAM
system for monocular, stereo, and RGB-D cameras,” IEEE Trans. Robot.,
vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1255–1262, Oct. 2017.
[28] K. Regmi and M. Shah, “Bridging the domain gap for Ground-to-Aerial
image matching,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019,
pp. 470–479.
[29] Y. Shi, X. Yu, D. Campbell, and H. Li, “Where am i looking at? Joint
location and orientation estimation by cross-view matching,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 4064–4072.
[30] H. Liu et al., “Epipolar rectiﬁcation method for a stereovision system with
telecentric cameras,” Opt. Lasers Eng., vol. 83, pp. 99–105, 2016.
[31] S. Hu and G. H. Lee, “Image-Based geo-localization using satellite im-
agery,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 128, pp. 1205–1219, 2020.
[32] R. A. Langel, “International geomagnetic reference ﬁeld,” J. Geomag-
netism Geoelectricity, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 679–707, 1992.
[33] M. Navabiand and M. Barati, “Mathematical modeling and simulation
of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld: A comparative study of the models on the
spacecraft attitude control application,” Appl. Math. Modelling, vol. 46,
pp. 365–381, 2017.
[34] C. Guo, H. Cai, and G. H. M. van der Heijden, “Feature extraction and
geomagnetic matching,” J. Navigation, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 799–811, 2013.
[35] Y. Ye, L. Bruzzone, J. Shan, F. Bovolo, and Q. Zhu, “Fast and robust
matching for multimodal remote sensing image registration,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 9059–9070, Nov. 2019.
[36] Y. Ye, J. Shan, L. Bruzzone, and L. Shen, “Robust registration of multi-
modal remote sensing images based on structural similarity,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 2941–2958, May 2017.
[37] A. Sibiryakov, “Fast and high-performance template matching method,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2011,
pp. 1417–1424.
[38] K. Briechle and U. D. Hanebeck, “Template matching using fast normal-
ized cross correlation,” Proc. Spie Opt. Pattern Recognit. XII, vol. 4387,
pp. 95–102, 2001.
[39] Y. Hel-Or, H. Hel-Or, and E. David, “Fast template matching in nonlinear
tone-mapped images,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Spain.
Barcelona, Nov. 2011, pp. 1355–1362.
[40] X. Huang, Y. Zhang, and X. Wang, “Kalman-Filtering-Based in-motion
coarse alignment for odometer-aided SINS,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 3364–3377, Dec. 2017.
[41] D. Nade, M. Bousbia-Salah, and M. Bettayeb, “Multi-sensor data fusion
for wheelchair position estimation with unscented kalman ﬁlter,” Int. J.
Automat. Comput., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 207–217, Apr. 2018.
[42] D.M.GoshenandI.Y.Bar,“Uniﬁedapproachtoinertialnavigationsystem
error modeling,” J. Guid., Control, Dyn., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 648–653,
May 1992.
[43] D. H. Titterton and J. L. Weston, Strapdown Inertial Navigation Technol-
ogy, 2nd ed. Hertfordshire, U.K.: Institution of Engineering and Technol-
ogy, 2004, pp. 253–255.
[44] X. Y. Zhang, P. Liu, X. Yi, and C. Zhang, “Observability analysis of
SINS/odometer integrated navigation,” in Proc. IEEE Chin. Guid., Navi-
gation Control Conf., Yantai. China, Aug. 2014, pp. 148–152.
[45] D. Dusha and L. Mejias, “Error analysis and attitude observability of a
monocular GPS/visual odometry integrated navigation ﬁlter,” Int. J. Robot.
Res., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 714–737, May 2012.
Jing Dong received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the National University
of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, in 2015. He is currently a Lecturer
with the School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Central South University,
Changsha, China, and with the College of Aerospace Science and Engineering,
National University of Defense Technology. His research interests include image
registration, moving object detection, and video stabilization.
Xingyu Ren received the bachelor’s degree from Chongqing Jiaotong Univer-
sity, Chongqing, China, in 2018. She is currently a Graduate Student with the
School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Central South University, Changsha,
China. Her research interests include INS/Odometer integration, multisensor
fusion, and its applications in navigation systems.
Songlai Han received the Ph.D. degree in optical engineering from the National
University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, in 2010. He is currently an
Associate Professor with the School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Central
South University, Changsha, China. His current research interests include optical
gyro, INS, GPS/INS integration, multisensor fusion, and stochastic theory and
its applications in navigation systems.
Shilin Luo received the B.Sc. degree in geography information science from
South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China, in 2017. He is currently
working toward the M.Sc. degree with the School of Aeronautics and Astronau-
tics, Central South University, Changsha, China. His current research interests
include inertial navigation and integrated navigation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
