warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0475.pdf
sha256: 157B48507C393752AC41A07850D6CBDB79AB8E0F3834B82707716E214DCD56CB
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 6
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
P2P-DroneLoc: Peer-to-Peer Localization for
GPS-Denied Drones using Camera and WiFi Fine
Time Measurement
Khadija Ashraf, Ashwin Ashok
kashraf1@student.gsu.edu, aashok@gsu.edu
Department of Computer Science, Georgia State University, Atlanta, USA
Abstract—In this work we design, implement, and evaluate a
drone assisted coordinated localization system to help navigate re-
motely operating Global Positioning System (GPS) denied drones.
Without any requirements of a base station or a central entity,
in this system, a GPS enabled helper drone offers localization
help to low functionality distress drones. The helper drone when
discovers a distressed drone flying in proximity, estimates the
distress drone’s absolute GPS location information respective to
its own location. This is performed by computing the relative
position of the distress drone with the helper drone. The estimated
location is then communicated to the distress drone. In this paper,
we evaluate two fundamental approaches for range estimation
for peer-to-peer relative positioning between drones: (a) camera
and computer vision projection theory, and (b) WiFi Fine Time
Measurements (FTM). We envision that a helper drone equips a
camera and a WiFi FTM access point (AP), while a distress drone
equips only a WiFi FTM AP. We evaluate our proposed peer-to-
peer localization via accuracy across three estimated measures:
(i) range or distance between the drones, (ii) GPS bearing (angle),
and (iii) GPS location (coordinates). Based on our analysis of our
dataset consisting of outdoor static and flying drones setup, our
methods result in a median localization accuracy within 1-4m.
Index Terms—Camera based localization, WiFi FTM ranging
based localization, UAV coordination and communication, drone
aided localization, GPS denied drone localization.
I. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) or drones,
are increasingly becoming popular due to their potential in
achieving sensing capabilities over wide spatial areas [1].
At the outset, fundamentally, all drones rely on robust GPS
location for precise automated navigation during their mission
flights. It is well known that GPS values are prone to errors
and failures (depending on the environment). More recently
it has also been demonstrated that drone GPS units are prone
to a variety of security attacks [2], all the more, revealing the
fragility and vulnerability of GPS on drones.
Failure or attack of drone GPS units can significantly com-
promise the mission safety – particularly, when the mission
involves high value payloads. For that reason, redundancy of
GPS values is important. Today, the best available method to
provide redundancy is the inclusion of additional GPS modules
and parallelizing GPS systems [3]. Considering the limited
payload capacities of drones and the corresponding trade off
with size and battery lifetime, such redundancy approaches
are bulky and largely impractical – especially, for medium
and small drones that may not be able to mount multiple
GPS units. This is because most GPS modules being used
on drones have integrated magnetometers and thus have to be
placed at a reasonable distance away from electromagnetic
field interference from integrated electronics and metallic
beams to ensure accurate and proper functionality. This way,
adding GPS redundancy through the inclusion of additional
GPS modules creates a space issue on most consumer drones
because each module has to be placed far from other modules
for magnetometers to function properly. It is due to these
restrictions that most consumer drones today, capable of
automated flight, only contain a single GPS module and lack
redundancy.
P2P-DroneLoc. To address the GPS unreliability problem in
drones, we propose an alternative solution to GPS redundancy
for multi drone systems. As shown in the conceptual illustra-
tion in Fig. 1, we propose a design where drones with no
GPS or non-functional GPS units are able to receive help
to localize themselves coordinated by a helper drone with a
functional GPS/location sensing unit. The key concept of our
methods is a helper drone (HD) tracks nearby GPS distressed
drones (DD), and then estimates the relative position of the
distress drone – by estimating the distance and bearing angle.
The absolute GPS coordinates of the distress drone can be
determined using the helper drone’s GPS coordinates and the
relative positioning with the distress drone by leveraging the
haversine formulation.
Proposed Approach. Most consumer and commercial drones
capable of automated flight have onboard cameras, inertial
measurement units (IMU) for motion sensing, computing
units, and wireless networking capability. To this end, we
leverage cameras and WiFi APs that are already deployed
commonly in drones. With advances to next generation of
WiFi (WiFi 6 and beyond), there are an increasing number of
WiFi devices and APs incorporating Fine Time Measurements
(FTM) capabilities – uses an ACK based prototol to measure
round trip time of radio signal to estimate range between two
WiFi FTM devices/APs. We propose to use the FTM range
estimates between helper and distress drone. For bearing or
angle, we use triangulation, either using a mediator drone
(referred to as pseudo-HD) if available or deploying two WiFi
FTM APs on the helper drone. The camera-based method is
designed with a single on-board camera fitted on the helper
drone. The helper uses the camera images to visually track the
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
978-1-6654-7340-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
978-1-6654-7340-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS) | 978-1-6654-7340-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ANTS56424.2022.10227756
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
Fig. 1: A conceptual diagram of proposed P2P DroneLoc system for remotely operating drones using on-board camera and
WiFi FTM ranging devices.
drone under distress, then applying the camera projection the-
ory on the image the helper computes distance and bearing of
distress drone. Then, using spherical trigonometry, the helper
drone estimates the distress drone’s absolute GPS latitude and
longitude coordinates. The helper uses WiFi communication
to inform the estimated location to the distress drone. In
our preliminary baseline work, we have already implemented
and prototyped an ACK based P2P WiFi communication to
conduct inter-drone data transfer. Note that in this paper, we
design, implement and evaluate the full fledged localization
where our prior work serves as a preliminary feasibility study.
The key contributions presented in this paper are,
1) Design and implementation of single camera based P2P
drone localization.
2) Implementation of a prototype system on two drones
that integrates camera and WiFi localization approaches
and deployment for real-world trials.
3) Extensive empirical evaluation of localization accuracy
in real-world outdoor flying and static drone settings.
The rest of the sections in the paper are organized as fol-
lows: Section II discusses related work, Section III presents an
overview of all the proposed localization methods, Section IV
discusses the detailed implementation of camera and WiFi
localization techniques. Section V discusses the evaluations,
and Section VI concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Computer Vision based target localization. There is a good
body of prior work in vision-based ground target localization
with a single UAV [4]–[6], and multiple UAVs [7], [8].
Our work is helping a flying drone to achieve its location
information with another single UAV. We propose an effective
approach of finding a near accurate GPS information of the
target UAV with help of only a single camera and with no
power hungry, complex computer vision algorithm execution.
A work [5] localizes a fixed target with a single camera.
Authors idea of finding target location was to triangulate
between the camera, the target, and a static hypothetical
reference point in the target plane itself. Camera-to-target,
and Camera-to-reference point angles were measured by back-
projecting LOS unit vectors derived from two pixelated points
retrieved from the detected target and the reference points in
the image frame. The advancement in our work is, we avoid
the complexity of finding Euler angles [5] from UAV’s IMU
sensors rather we derive distance [9], and bearing from camera
geometry and then use the Haversine Great circle distance
formula [10] to find relative GPS coordinates.
UAV-assisted localization—Optical and Radio Fusion. Al-
most all UAV assisted localization are currently focused on
search/rescue operations onto humans or onto static targets.
However, when an UAV itself is in need of localization
assistance, the norm is that a ground station sends help,
contrary to the approach of an active UAV helping the lost
UAV recovering location information. Our approach is truly
distributed and uses off-the-shelf hardware and technology
already available on drones. Among the few drone-assisted
target localization research, [11], uses an UAV to fly over a
target object and assigns that target the UAV’s location value.
It uses RSSI and AoA technique with several antennas to
estimate target’s approximate positioning. Thus [11] may gen-
erate serious erroneous positioning thus leads to an unreliable
localization assistance. [12] another work proposed an UAV-
assisted target localization using LoRa network for ground
level IoT device localization where the UAVs act as mobile
gateways. This work requires a LoRa network setup with
a gateway and only localizes ground IoT devices registered
to that specific LoRa network. Whereas, we develop more
accurate UAV-assisted mobile target localization without any
need of specific centralized or ground infrastructure setup.
III. UAV ASSISTED COORDINATED LOCALIZATION
To ensure clarity, we revisit the key abbreviations promi-
nently used in the rest of the paper: (a) HD - Helper Drone,
(b) DD - Distress Drone, (c) Pseudo HD - Pseudo or Mediating
Helper Drone.
The localization assistance process is initiated with the
distress drone discovery, by either a HD or by the DD. In the
rest of this section, we discuss our camera-based and WiFi
FTM based localization methods.
A. Camera-based localization with a single HD
In this method the HD reaches to a distress drone (inde-
pendently or from a group) to provide localization assistance.
In this setup the HD has an on-board camera and an active
GPS module. The DD does not carry any camera. The location
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
assistance process starts with detecting the flying DD in the
captured image frame. An image frame indicates a point
of time and a specific location in the entire duration of
DD’s flight. Moreover, an image frame can provide position
information like, the distance between HD to DD, and the
bearing angle between HD to DD for that point of time. We
synchronize image capturing timestamp with the built-in GPS
(serving as HD’s ground truth location). The DD’s ground
truth location is collected using its onboard GPS-module. The
time-synchronization ensures that, we are able to estimate
DD’s unknown location (GPS) by estimating distance, and
bearing angle from a camera image frame and also be able
to validate the estimated location with ground truth location.
B. WiFiFTM ranging based localization with a HD and a
Pseudo-HD
In this design we only use WiFi FTM ranging technology
to provide location assistance to the DD. The HD and DD
are each equipped with a WiFi FTM transceiver. However,
in this radio based localization assistance method we need
at least three drones in the scene. The three drones help
setup triangulation to estimate the relative position of the
DD compared to other two drone’s position in the 3D world.
This method is camera independent and instead introduces
a secondary helper drone (pseudo HD). A pseudo-HD is in
reality another DD which is location enabled through some
means. We posit that, among a group of DDs a recently
localized DD can be acting as a pseudo-HD and assist the
primary HD in helping other DDs. The rationale for the three
drone (triangulation) approach is, firstly, this method enables
us estimating bearing using angle of arrival (AoA) without
help of any on-board camera in any of the drones in the
scene, and secondly, with the help of HD, a DD, once received
localization assistance can then be denominated as a pseudo
HD and can start to help other DDs in vicinity.
C. Location Estimation of DD
After the detection of a distressed drone we estimate the
location of that distressed drone. The idea is, we can find the
latitude-longitude of point B relative to point A when we know
the latitude-longitude of point A, the azimuth/bearing of point
B as seen from point A, and the euclidean distance between
point A to point B. In the context of our system, point A
refers to helper drone and point B to a distressed drone. For
estimating bearing and distance we explore the potential of
both the optical (camera) and radio (WiFi) channels. Note
that, we get the altitude information from drone altimeter.
However, changes of altitude of the flying DD does not effect
our proposed localization methods. In the next section IV we
describe the mechanics of both our optical and radio based
location estimation methods.
IV. LOCALIZATION METHOD
A. Location Estimation in Optical Channel
We design methods to estimate location of a DD using
only a single on-board camera in the HD. We use computer
Fig. 2: Bearing between HD to DD estimated from image.
vision camera projection theory to estimate the distance and
bearing between HD to DD, then apply spherical trigonometry
formulas [13] to estimate the absolute lat-long of DD.
Step 1A. Distance Measurement. [Finding distance between
HD’s on-board camera and the detected DD in the image
frame] From the system calibration the DD’s real world di-
mensions are known. Therefore, having the DD as a reference
object on the camera image frame enables us to measure the
world distance between the DD and the HD. The key concept
of estimating real-world distance between a single camera to
an object captured in the image frame is, ratio of the size of the
captured object on the image sensor and the size of the object
in real life is the same as the ratio between the focal length
and distance to the object (perspective projection theory).
Step 2A. Bearing Measurement. [Finding bearing angle
between HD’s on-board camera and the detected DD in the
image frame] The bearing angle that is the real world angle
between HD’s north to the DD in clockwise direction, can
be estimated from the camera image. Finding angle between
HD on-board camera to the DD in the image frame leads to
estimating the actual bearing angle calculation with an offset
angle denoting north of the HD itself. In our hardware setup,
we assume the north of the HD is pointing towards the sky,
south is pointing to the ground, east to the left and west to the
right of drone’s forward direction, respectively. We attached
our camera facing forward to cover the frontal view of the HD,
considering the target object to be captured in the HD’s camera
is another flying drone (possibly a DD). Therefore, according
to our camera orientation, we claim the angle between the
camera to detected DD refers to the actual bearing angle.
The bearing angle estimation includes, (i) detecting flying
DD in a captured image, and (ii) measuring angle between
the image frame bottom-middle pixel and the midpoint pixel
of DD’s bounding box. We borrowed the drone detection
module from our baseline work in the step 1A. However, we
implemented the bearing angle measurement in (ii) using the
concept of angle measurement between camera to an object
in image frame. We posit that, the image midline connecting
image bottom-mid pixel (x, y) and top-mid pixel (x1, y1) is
vector⃗v1, and the line connecting the drone bounding box mid
pixel (x2, y2) and image bottom-mid pixel (x, y) is vector⃗v2.
We can say that both⃗v1 and⃗v2 projects onto the image center
as two rays from some real world 3D points. Now, with the
inverse camera intrinsic matrix and given pixels representing
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
these vectors, those same rays can be back projected into the
3D world. Therefore, given our image top-mid pixel (x1, y1)
and bounding box mid-pixel (x2, y2), we back project vectors⃗
v1 and⃗v2 into 3D space. The angle between them is then
computed from the dot product. Fig. 2 shows an image frame
taken from our dataset with estimated bearing marker.
B. Location Estimation in Radio Channel
As mentioned before, the WiFiFTM method requires
an HD with on-board AP, a pseudo-HD with on-board
FTM transceiver, and the DD with another on-board FTM
transceiver. We assume, the three drones form a triangle while
flying. The localization process follows below steps.
• The distance between HD to DD, pseudo-HD to DD, and
HD to pseudo-HD is measured using WiFi FTM rang-
ing protocol. The distances form a hypothetical triangle
where each distance between any two drones refers to a
side of the triangle and the drones are vertices.
• From the law of cosine the SSS triangle is solved and the
angles are measured.
• Given two known GPS coordinates of HD, and pseudo-
HD, and distance between HD to pseudo-HD we estimate
the bearing angle between HD and pseudo-HD.
• The HD calculates the bearing from its location to the
DD’s location in reference to the triangle-angles and the
bearing between HD and pseudo-HD.
• Now that the HD has its own latitude-longitude pair, the
distance between itself and the DD, and the bearing of
DD as seen from HD itself, therefore, the HD estimates
the target latitude-longitude pair of the DD using spher-
ical trigonometry and sends along the pair to the DD.
Step 1B. Distance Measurement: [Finding distance between
HD to DD, pseudo-HD to DD, and HD to pseudo-HD] We
use WiFi FTM ranging protocol for distance measurements.
We synchronize the on-board ground truth GPS values with
these distance measurements using timestamps to validate both
estimated distances and estimated GPS coordinates of DD.
(a) HD, pseudo-HD w.r.t origin
(b) Possible locations of DD
Fig. 3: Bearing estimation of DD w.r.t HD and pseudo-HD,
through fusion of triangulation and spherical trigonometry.
Step 2B. Bearing, and Latitude-Longitude Measurement:
[Finding bearing angle of DD as seen from HD, and estimating
latitude longitude] After solving the SSS triangle we have
all three angles ∠A, ∠B, ∠C and sides a, b, c. In the 3D
space, we imagine a coordinate system, where A is located
in the origin. The bearing of B can be derived from the pair
of latitude-longitude of A, B and the distance between A, B
that is, c. Thus, B’s location in the space with respect to A
can be discovered with the help of bearing and distance as
shown in sub fig. 3a. Now, interestingly, we have the angle
∠A that is ∠BAC, so two possible positions of DD can be
derived C and C′. One, where C is located on one side of the
hypothetical line AB, or in the other side as shown in sub fig.
3b. Since, we do not have any knowledge of C’s bearing from
either A or B, an approach to rule out a location among C and
C′ is to have information about DD’s previous location. So,
we propose and implement the aspect, by broadcasting DD’s
last active location coordinates. The concept is, the newly
estimated location is highly prone to be closer to the previous
active location. As shown in the sub fig. 3b the accepted newly
estimated location of DD is C assuming the blue star denotes
the previous active location of the DD, thus C′ is ruled out
since its comparatively far from the previous location.
V. EVALUATION
A. Experiment Setup
The hardware configuration involving proposed camera and
WiFi FTM methods includes mainly (i) a single camera, (ii)
two WiFi FTM client devices, (iii) one FTM supported WiFi
access point (AP), (iv) Helper Drone, (v) Distress Drone, and
a (vi) NVIDIA Jetson Nano computing/processing unit. For
the camera unit we use footage of a single camera among
two cameras of the ZED that we mounted in our HD (see
Figure 4). For the FTM client devices we use two Pixel2
phones. Both the phones have the WiFiRttScan app installed.
WiFiRTTScan app enables real-time wireless ranging between
the FTM client and the AP with 1-2 meter range accuracy. We
use Google Nest WiFi router as the AP. This Google WiFi
supports IEEE 802.11mc FTM RTT since 2018 and it uses a
single Qualcomm IPQ4019 chipset for both 2.4 GHz (no FTM
RTT) and 5 GHz (FTM RTT enabled). With the two client
devices and a single AP we can only get distances between any
two devices, however, for some of our experiments we need
distances between every pair of drones in a three-drone setup.
Hence, we use another android app WiFiNanScan that collects
distance between the other two drones. WiFiNanScan app uses
IEEE 802.11mc FTM RTT too. Moreover, The app measures
the distance between two smartphones using the Wi-Fi Aware
protocol (also called Neighborhood Aware Networking(NAN).
The helper drone in our system is a basic drone with built-
in flight controller, GPS, barometer, and IMU. We further
install a WiFi transceiver unit and a NVIDIA Jetson Nano
board to serve as a processing unit. Distress drone however
in our system design, is a low-payload drone comparative to
the helper drone without the GPS and any camera modules
installed.
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
Fig. 4: From left HD’s forward view with on-board camera, next HD’s backward view while performing camera calibration,
then the DD with on-board pixel 2 (WiFi FTM RTT client device), lastly a snapshot of HD filming a flying DD.
Fig. 5: Camera-based localization evaluation results. From left, (i) estimated bearing, (ii) estimated distance accuracy, (iii)
estimated location accuracy, (iv) comparison of estimated distance and location accuracy.
Fig. 6: WifiFTM ranging based localization with a helper drone and a pseudo helper drone. From left, (i) estimated bearing
accuracy, (ii) estimated distance accuracy, (iii) estimated location accuracy
B. Results
We present the experiment based evaluation of the two
methods independently. We evaluate our system based on the
localization accuracy based on the ranging error, angle esti-
mation error and the overall estimated GPS coordinates error.
We also present the current prototype status that integrates
both camera and radio localization in an actual fully functional
drone system.
(1) Single Camera based Localization Accuracy
Setup and Methodology: Our experiments involved a
single HD located static and a single DD flying in the range
of 3 to 10 meters of the HD. The HD’s on-board camera takes
video/picture of the flying DD. The images are processed to
estimate the distance and bearing angle between the HD and
the DD. To validate estimated distance, bearing, and location
(lat-long) we require (1) ground truth distance (GT-distance),
(2) ground truth bearing (GT-bearing), and (3) ground truth
GPS (GT-GPS) measurements between the HD and the DD.
We measure GT-distance from GPS coordinates recorded by
the HD and DD. The GPS data has dual usage, one is GT-
distance, and another is GT-GPS during our evaluation. In
a data collection session, a flying DD’s GPS coordinates
change depending on its changing positions, however, the
coordinates remain unchanged for the static HD. Both the
HD and DD records GPS coordinates continuously. We also
marked our outdoor experiment site’s ground with meter
markers. These markers are an extra level of, more accurate
than GPS distancing, verification for camera-to-DD distance
estimation that serves us as a redundant set of GT-distances.
Contrarily, GT-bearing between camera to an object can be
derived by presuming a triangle formed by three points, with
three sides connecting two points on the detected object and
the other point is the camera itself. Since collecting these
triangle side measurements in real world units is only realistic
in static setups and not possible when drones are mobile, so,
for validation of estimated bearing we rely on the accuracy of
the estimated location as a whole.
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
Metrics: We evaluate the camera-based localization for, (i)
accuracy of the estimated distance between the HD (camera)
and the DD (ii) accuracy of estimated GPS location of DD.
The distance and location estimation accuracy is defined by
error between the estimated distance to GT-GPS distancing,
and estimated location to GT-GPS coordinates respectively.
Results Discussion: In Fig. 5 left-most (first from left),
we report estimated bearing from all our image datasets. We
observe that mostly the bearing values are in the range of
5◦to 10◦and some are between 325◦to 350◦. We explain
these bearing values by our camera FOV and the concept
of bearing measurement. According to the placement of the
camera to cover up the frontal view it shots objects between 0◦
to 90◦that is the right half of the image frame, and between
270◦to 360◦, that is the left half of the image frame. In the
second-from-left plot we show estimated distance accuracy for
all datasets, with a median of 1.5m with spread of (+/-)1m.
The third plot shows estimated GPS location accuracy, with a
median of 4.5m with spread of (+/-)2m. Due to drone mobility,
a limitation of using GPS as ground truth is that we have to be
prepared to deal with noisy ground truth data. This explains
the reason for the median of 4.5m error in GPS coordinate
estimation as the ground-truth itself can incur an average 3m
error (standard GPS accuracy). In the right-most (fourth from
left) graph in Fig. 5 we show the comparison between camera
estimated distance error and camera estimated location error.
We observe that the errors, though not exactly matching in a
linear fashion, are consistent with GPS errors, however, are at
a lower value.
(2) WiFi FTM Ranging Based Localization Assistance with
HD and Pseudo-HD
Setup and Methodology: In this setup we have a static
HD, a static pseudo-HD, and a DD flying in proximity of
the HD and pseudo-HD ranging from 3 meters to 15 meters.
The ranging data collected in this experiment are (i) distance
between HD to DD collected using WiFiRttScan, (ii) distance
between HD to Pseudo-HD collected using WiFiRTTScan,
and (ii) distance between DD to Pseudo-HD collected using
WiFiNanScan. We use two WiFiFTM RTT devices and an
AP, that is, two pixel phones attached on the pseudo-HD, DD,
and AP on the HD. Similar to the camera based localization
we validate estimated distance, bearing, and location of our
generated results.
Results Discussion: In Fig. 6 we show the bespoke accu-
racy values at different distances, i.e., 3, 5, 7, 10, 15 (meters).
The distance groups refer to the ground markers that we
mentioned earlier while describing our different experiment
setups. We adopt the distance group concept to demonstrate
exactly how our localization methods performs in different
distances. The first-from-left plot shows absolute errors of
bearing estimation for all datasets. The median accuracy of
estimated bearing over all the distance groups is 8◦with
spread of (+/-) 9◦. The second-from-left plot shows estimated
distance accuracy for all distance groups. The median accuracy
of estimated distance over all the distance groups is 1m with
spread of (+/-)1m. In the third-from-left plot, the median
accuracy of estimated location over all the distance groups
is 1m with spread of (+/-)1m. Overall, the WiFi FTM based
results indicate that our measurements are in conformity with
the standard FTM ranging accuracy of about 1m. We have been
able to demonstrate that by using a P2P WiFi FTM modality,
we can estimate the GPS coordinates with the same fidelity
as the ranging accuracy for state-of-the-art FTM technology.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work we designed and evaluated methods for peer-to-
peer truly distributed drone-to-drone localization. The notion
is to present a GPS redundancy/alternative to low payload
smaller drones with common-already existing on-board hard-
ware and processing power. We designed localization methods
that estimate distance, bearing, which are used to compute
GPS coordinates between HD and the DD by using a (1)
camera (optical) and (2) WiFi (radio) ranging. The camera-
based method provides location accuracy in median range of
1–3m with a standard deviation of 2m, and the WiFi FTM
ranging based method provides location accuracy of 1m with
standard deviation of 1m.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Science Founda-
tion (NSF) under Grant CNS-1910133.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Chen, J. Xiong, X. Chen, S. I. Lee, K. Chen, D. Han, D. Fang,
Z. Tang, and Z. Wang, “Widesee: Towards wide-area contactless wireless
sensing.”
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019.
[2] J. Noh, Y. Kwon, Y. Son, H. Shin, D. Kim, J. Choi, and Y. Kim, “Tractor
beam: Safe-hijacking of consumer drones with adaptive gps spoofing,”
vol. 22, no. 2, 2019.
[3] I. Um, S. Park, H. T. Kim, and H. Kim, “Configuring rtk-gps architecture
for system redundancy in multi-drone operations,” IEEE Access, 2020.
[4] J. D. Redding, T. W. McLain, R. W. Beard, and C. Taylor, “Vision-
based target localization from a fixed-wing miniature air vehicle,” 2006
American Control Conference, pp. 6 pp.–, 2006.
[5] S. Sohn, B. Lee, J. Kim, and C. Kee, “Vision-based real-time target
localization for single-antenna gps-guided uav,” IEEE Transactions on
Aerospace and Electronic Systems, 2008.
[6] V. Dobrokhodov, I. Kaminer, K. Jones, and R. Ghabcheloo, “Vision-
based tracking and motion estimation for moving targets using small
uavs,” in 2006 American Control Conference, 2006, pp. 6 pp.–.
[7] R. W. Deming and L. I. Perlovsky, “Concurrent multi-target localization,
data association, and navigation for a swarm of flying sensors,” 2007.
[8] S. Minaeian, J. Liu, and Y.-J. Son, “Vision-based target detection and
localization via a team of cooperative uav and ugvs,” IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 46, no. 7, 2016.
[9] K. Ashraf, V. Varadarajan, M. R. Rahman, R. Walden, and A. Ashok,
“See-through a vehicle: Augmenting road safety information using
visual perception and camera communication in vehicles,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 4, 2021.
[10] J. P. Hogendijk, “Glen van brummelen. heavenly mathematics: The
forgotten art of spherical trigonometry.” Isis, vol. 105, no. 1, pp.
207–208, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1086/676763
[11] A. Wang, X. Ji, D. Wu, X. Bai, N. Ding, J. Pang, S. Chen, X. Chen,
and D. Fang, “Guideloc: Uav-assisted multitarget localization system for
disaster rescue,” Mob. Inf. Syst., 2017.
[12] V. Delafontaine, F. Schiano, G. Cocco, A. Rusu, and D. Flore-
ano, “Drone-aided localization in lora iot networks,” in 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2020.
[13] C.
Veness,
“Destination
point
along
great-circle
given
distance
and
bearing
from
start
point,”
http://www.movable-
type.co.uk/scripts/latlong.html, 2022, [Online; accessed 15-May-2022].
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
2022 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS): Women in 
Engineering (WiE)
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
