warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0481.pdf
sha256: 5A18F70C7A3A32D8F14636C576DCBD6C43614CC2CB51554DAC07723906D4EDA7
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 8
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
An Onboard Transformer-Based Physics-Informed System for UAV
Trajectory Prediction and State Classification in GNSS-denied Environments
Nicolas Souli, Yiannis Grigoriou, Panagiotis Chrysanthou, Panayiotis Kolios, and Georgios Ellinas
Abstract— This work introduces a real-time, lightweight sys-
tem deployed onboard unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) that
achieves the two-fold objective of state classification and tra-
jectory prediction by integrating a Transformer-based physics-
informed learning model with an extended Kalman filter (EKF).
The proposed framework employs a two-stage sensor fusion
mechanism that combines a physics-informed Transformer with
an EKF-based measurement augmentation. In the first stage,
an EKF fuses onboard sensor readings together with vision-
derived measurements (optical flow measurements) and external
sensor information (such as weather station data of wind speed
and direction) to construct an augmented and denoised input
measurement vector. In the second stage, the resulting filtered
state estimates are fed into a physics-informed Transformer
network that exploits shared feature learning to jointly en-
hance robustness and improve state classification and trajectory
forecasting performance in Global Navigation Satellite System
(GNSS)-denied environments. The proposed EKF-assisted AI
framework is trained and validated on a custom dataset of
UAV trajectories collected across various outdoor environments,
and its prototype implementation is thoroughly assessed and
validated in real-world outdoor experiments.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the rapid advancements in UAV technology, UAVs
are increasingly used in a large number of civilian applica-
tions, where accurate UAV position estimation is becoming
essential for autonomous flight to ensure safety while meet-
ing latency, security, and reliability constraints. Typically,
UAV localization is achieved using onboard sensors and
GNSS, which serves as the primary positioning solution due
to its meter-level accuracy under open-sky and favorable
environmental conditions [1]. Nevertheless, accurate position
and state estimation for reliable and robust navigation [2],
[3] remains a critical challenge when GNSS signals are
degraded, obstructed, or inaccessible, leading to the need
for robust and efficient navigation solutions, particularly in
GNSS-denied environments or in scenarios where onboard
sensors may malfunction [4], [5].
Recent research has primarily considered single-task neu-
ral network (NN) approaches for UAV state classification
or trajectory prediction, frequently based on recurrent ar-
chitectures such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and
N. Souli, Y. Grigoriou, P. Chrysanthou and G. Ellinas are with the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the KIOS Research
and Innovation Center of Excellence (KIOS CoE), University of Cyprus,
Nicosia, Cyprus. P. Kolios is with the Department of Computer Science and
the KIOS CoE, University of Cyprus. Emails: {nsouli02, grigoriou.yiannis,
chrysanthou.a.panagiotis, pkolios, gellinas}@ucy.ac.cy
This work was supported by the PROTECDOME project, implemented
under the Internal Security Fund, co-financed by the European Union and the
Republic of Cyprus and by the European Union’s Horizon Europe research
and innovation program under grant agreement No 101187121 (EUSOME).
It was also partially supported from the Republic of Cyprus through the
Deputy Ministry of Research, Innovation and Digital Policy.
long short-term memory (LSTM) [6], [7]. However, as these
models demonstrate limited capability in modeling long-
range temporal relationships over extended time horizons,
Transformer-based techniques leveraging self-attention have
gained increasing attention and have shown improved effec-
tiveness in learning long-term temporal structure in time-
series data [8], [9]. Furthermore, reservoir computing (RC)
approaches have been investigated as lightweight alternatives
for temporal modeling, offering computational efficiency
and fast training while maintaining accurate prediction per-
formance [10]. In addition, Transformer-based architectures
combined with RC demonstrated a balance between trajec-
tory prediction accuracy and onboard feasibility for UAV
applications [11]. Further, physics-informed Transformers
incorporate domain constraints to improve forecasting and
classification accuracy beyond data-driven methods [12],
[13]. However, their effectiveness for GNSS-denied au-
tonomous UAV navigation remains largely unexplored.
This work extends our previously proposed Transformer-
based multi-task learning framework (MTLF-FVO) [14],
which provided robust UAV localization and state identifi-
cation following a data-driven, Transformer-based multi-task
architecture that combined onboard telemetry [e.g., Inertial
measurement unit (IMU), velocity, acceleration, and external
sensor modalities such as wind speed and direction] with
vision-derived feature-based visual odometry measurements.
Specifically, this work presents a lightweight, onboard, real-
time UAV system for joint state identification and trajectory
prediction [Enhanced Multi-task Transformer-based Physics-
informed (EMT-TPI)], by incorporating a physics-informed
Transformer with a two-stage sensor-fusion pipeline. In
the first stage, an EKF fuses multi-modal onboard iner-
tial measurements with vision-derived measurements (e.g.,
optical flow) to generate an augmented, uncertainty-aware
state estimate, while in the second stage a physics-informed
Transformer leverages these filtered estimates to estimate
the UAV trajectory and classify the flight state. By fus-
ing EKF (recursive uncertainty propagation) with physics-
based regularization, EMT-TPI mitigates the limitations of
model-driven filtering, data-driven forecasting, and stan-
dalone physics-informed learning, making it suitable for real-
time operational deployment.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as
follows: (i) the design of a Transformer-based multi-task
learning (MTL) architecture that jointly performs UAV state
identification and 3D trajectory prediction in GNSS-denied
environments using EKF-augmented multi-modal inertial,
external sensor measurements, and vision inputs for safety
monitoring and risk-aware autonomy; (ii) the use of an EKF-
assisted physics-informed training objective that improves
2026 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS)
June 15-18, 2026. Corfu, Greece
979-8-3315-9316-2/26/$31.00 ©2026 IEEE
1420
2026 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS) | 979-8-3315-9316-2/26/$31.00 ©2026 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICUAS69441.2026.11598599
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:06:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
forecasting accuracy and robustness; (iii) a lightweight
onboard prototype implementation enabling real-time sen-
sor data handling and low-latency inference on resource-
constrained UAV platforms; and (iv) extensive testing of the
prototype under practical operating conditions, demonstrat-
ing reliable state classification and accurate 3D trajectory
forecasting.
II. RELATED WORK
Conventional
UAV
state
estimation
techniques
are
mainly based on simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) [15] and visual–inertial odometry (VIO) [16] for
continuous pose tracking. However, their increased compu-
tational cost and performance degradation in challenging out-
door environments have led to the investigation of learning-
based approaches [17], which have demonstrated improved
performance across diverse conditions.
Model-based UAV trajectory prediction is typically for-
mulated using nonlinear rigid-body state-space dynamics
with recursive Bayesian estimation, where EKF is widely
utilized due to its computational efficiency and real-time
suitability for onboard use. In [18], the authors presented
a quadrotor translational and rotational dynamics method
within an EKF for recursive state propagation, while in a
similar vein, in [19] a quaternion-based EKF formulation was
proposed to improve attitude-estimation stability. Moreover,
[20] proposed an inertial propagation with visual updates in a
tightly coupled visual–inertial filtering framework for micro
aerial vehicle state estimation. In addition, visual–inertial
systems were investigated to enhance trajectory prediction
and robustness through IMU integration, or keyframe-based
optimization [21], [22].
In parallel, UAV trajectory prediction has also been ad-
dressed using data-driven learning models, with Transformer-
based architectures being used to model longer temporal
dependencies (as compared to RNNs/LSTMs) [8]. However,
existing Transformer-based models may still degrade across
diverse scenarios and extended horizons [23], motivating
more robust hybrid forecasting strategies. Thus, physics-
informed Transformer models have been recently investi-
gated for long-horizon prediction. For example, [24] intro-
duced a physics-informed Transformer network for hyper-
sonic glide vehicle trajectory forecasting; however, its depen-
dence on synthetic trajectories, fixed-length input sequences,
limited physical modeling, and the absence of real-world
outdoor evaluation restricts its generalization to more com-
plex scenarios. Also, [25] proposed a physics-informed deep
learning approach for highway vehicle prediction, but its one-
dimensional formulation, fixed-length inputs, and reliance on
synthetic data limit applicability to multi-dimensional and
dynamically rich environments.
Further, [26] proposed a neural network model to solve
multiple objectives by sharing representations, which has
been demonstrated to improve generalization and reduce
overfitting [27]. Typical MTL methods employ parameter
sharing and task-specific modules (e.g., attention mecha-
nism) [27]. In UAV scenarios, MTL can jointly optimize ob-
jectives such as state identification and trajectory prediction
by exploiting shared features, thereby reducing dependence
on large annotated datasets that are often difficult to acquire
[28].
Although Transformer-based methods have demonstrated
increased performance in single-task trajectory forecasting
or classification, their integration into a unified, physics-
informed MTL framework for UAV operations remains lim-
ited, particularly under real-world conditions where sensing
is multi-modal and uncertainty must be managed online.
Moreover, existing studies are often evaluated on synthetic
data and frequently assume fixed-length input sequences,
which constrains deployment in practical flight scenarios.
To overcome these limitations, this work proposes EMT-TPI,
a lightweight onboard architecture that combines two-stage
multi-modal sensor fusion, where initially an EKF fuses on-
board inertial measurements with vision-based measurements
and external sensing to create an augmented measurement
vector, and subsequently a physics-informed Transformer-
based MTL model jointly performs real-time UAV state
identification and 3D trajectory prediction in GNSS-denied
outdoor environments.
III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The proposed system employs a modular, payload soft-
ware development kit (PSDK)-based architecture to pro-
cess UAV telemetry, onboard camera streams, and external
weather-sensor measurements in real time. As shown in
Fig. 1, raw telemetry data is acquired directly through the
UAV’s (DJI) PSDK. The system subscribes to telemetry
data topics and processes the camera video feed to compute
visual odometry (VO) measurements. Both the frame-based
visual odometry and the telemetry data streams are fused
through a 12-state EKF to estimate UAV position, velocity,
attitude, and accelerometer biases. The fused state estimates,
together with weather-related inputs, are then forwarded to
the multitask Transformer model for trajectory prediction and
state identification.
Fig. 1: EMT-TPI model framework.
A. Feature-based Visual Odometry
This section describes the feature-based visual odometry
module used to estimate the UAV’s horizontal displacement
from consecutive camera frames [14].
1421
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:06:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
1) Feature-based Motion Estimation for UAV Navigation:
This module runs in real time on the onboard compute stack
using DJI’s PSDK at 10 Hz. For each incoming frame,
the pipeline applies a region-of-interest mask, extracts and
matches sparse features to the previous frame, rejects outliers
through RANSAC [29], and estimates the inter-frame pixel
displacement. The displacement is then converted to metric
units using the camera field of view (FOV) and the measured
altitude, rotated to compensate for the UAV heading, and
integrated over time. Since VO alone accumulates drift
and becomes unreliable during strong vertical motion or
non-downward viewing, the implementation fuses the visual
displacement with onboard telemetry velocities.
2) Image Processing: Each frame is pre-processed to
improve robustness and reduce the computational cost of
feature extraction. The implementation crops the input to a
centered square region and applies a circular binary mask.
This masking suppresses peripheral regions that often ex-
hibit higher distortion and motion blur, while retaining the
central region that provides more stable feature tracks. The
masked image is then converted to grayscale before feature
extraction.
3) Sparse Feature Extraction and Matching: Sparse key-
points and binary descriptors are extracted using ORB (Ori-
ented FAST and Rotated BRIEF), a lightweight feature ex-
tractor/descriptor that is well-suited for real-time operation.
The descriptors are matched between consecutive frames
using a brute-force matcher with Hamming distance and
cross-check enabled [30], which yields mutually consistent
correspondences. Let {(pk−1
pixeli, pk
pixeli)}M
i=1 denote the ini-
tial set of matched keypoints in the previous and current
frames, respectively, with M the total number of matched
keypoints between the two consecutive frames.
4) Outlier Rejection and Pixel Displacement Estimation:
To reject false correspondences caused by repetitive textures
or fast viewpoint changes, the implementation estimates a
ground-plane homography using RANSAC and retains only
the geometrically consistent matches (with a 5-pixel repro-
jection threshold) [29]. The homography is used to identify
geometrically consistent correspondences (inliers) and is not
decomposed to recover pose. Given N inlier matches, the
average pixel displacement (for the x and y directions) is
computed as ∆x =
1
N
PN
i=1

xk
pixeli −xk−1
pixeli

and ∆y =
1
N
PN
i=1

yk
pixeli −yk−1
pixeli

.
5) Pixel-to-World Coordinate Transformation: The av-
erage pixel displacement (∆x, ∆y) is converted to metric
displacement under the ground-plane approximation. With
alt denoting the UAV’s altitude, the physical footprint of
the image is computed as FOVx = 2 · alt · tan
  θh
2

and
FOVy = 2 · alt · tan
  θv
2

(all angular quantities, including
the horizontal and vertical FOVs θh and θv are expressed in
radians).
Also, the meters-per-pixel factors in horizontal (mx) and
vertical directions (my) are determined as mx = FOVx
W
and
my = FOVy
H
with H and W denoting the frame’s height and
width, respectively. Therefore, the translation from pixel to
meter units ∆xreal, ∆yreal is calculated as ∆xreal = ∆x · mx
and ∆yreal = ∆y · my.
6) Compensation for Drone Orientation: The computed
displacement vector (in meters) is aligned with the navigation
reference frame by compensating for the UAV heading angle
ψ [29]. A standard two-dimensional rotation is applied to
obtain ∆x′, ∆y′

∆x′
∆y′

=

cos ψ
−sin ψ
sin ψ
cos ψ
 
∆xreal
∆yreal

.
(1)
7) Visual-Telemetry Fusion and Gating: To improve ro-
bustness in GNSS-denied operation, the implementation
fuses the VO displacement with the horizontal velocity
components provided by onboard telemetry.
B. EKF Module
An EKF is used to fuse high-rate IMU measurements
with measurements of position, velocity, and heading. The
EKF estimates a 12-dimensional state that includes the
full 3D kinematics, Euler attitude (Euler angle vector), and
accelerometer bias.
C. State Vector
The state vector Xk ∈R12 at time step k is defined as
Xk =
pT
k
vT
k
ΘT
k
bT
a,k
T , where pk = [px, py, pz]T
denotes the estimated position (in meters), updated using
fused VO/telemetry measurements, while vk = [vx, vy, vz]T
denotes the velocity (m/s). The vehicle orientation (Euler
attitude) is given by Θk = [ϕ, θ, ψ]T , represented by Euler
angles (roll, pitch, yaw) in radians. Additionally, accelerom-
eter errors are modeled by ba,k = [bax, bay, baz]T for the
accelerometer bias (m/s2).
D. Process Model (Prediction Step)
The prediction step is performed by propagating the state
forward using IMU measurements as control inputs. Let
uk = [˜aT
k , ˜ωT
k ]T be the raw IMU (accelerometer, angular
velocity) measurements. In the implemented model, only the
accelerometer measurements are corrected by subtracting the
estimated accelerometer bias as ˆak = ˜ak −ba,k, while the
angular velocity measurements are defined as ˆωk = ˜ωk.
1) Attitude Update: The rate of change of Euler an-
gles is related to the body-frame angular velocity ˆωk =
[ωx,k, ωy,k, ωz,k]T by the transformation matrix W(Θ)
˙Θ = W(Θ)ˆω =


1
sin ϕ tan θ
cos ϕ tan θ
0
cos ϕ
−sin ϕ
0
sin ϕ/ cos θ
cos ϕ/ cos θ




ωx
ωy
ωz

.
(2)
The discrete update is then computed as Θk+1 = Θk +
˙Θk∆k.
2) Velocity and Position Update: The accelerometer mea-
sures specific force on the body frame. This measurement
is first rotated to the Earth frame using the rotation matrix
R(Θk) and then used to compute aearth = R(Θk)ˆak. In the
current implementation, the accelerometer input is treated
as linear acceleration. The discrete kinematics (velocity and
position) are defined as vk+1 = vk + aearth∆k and pk+1 =
pk + vk∆k + 1
2aearth∆k2, respectively.
1422
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:06:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
3) Bias Estimation: Sensor biases are estimated recur-
sively within the filter. In the prediction model, the ac-
celerometer bias is treated as a random walk process driven
by process noise, implying that it is assumed to be constant
between time steps with small stochastic drift (i.e., ba,k+1
= ba,k). The Jacobian matrix F couples accelerometer bias
errors to the velocity states through ∂v/∂ba ≈−R(Θk)∆k.
Consequently, when a discrepancy arises between the pre-
dicted state (integrated from IMU data) and the measured ob-
servations (position or velocity), the Kalman gain K projects
this measurement residual (innovation) onto the bias states,
continuously correcting ba to reduce overall estimation error.
E. Measurement Model (Update Step)
Three types of measurements are processed by the EKF,
each sampled at 10 Hz.
1) Position Update: A 3D position measurement zpos,k ∈
R3 is created by integrating the VO computed displace-
ments in the local frame and combining them with the
onboard rangefinder measurements that are incorporated as
zpos,k = Hpos Xk + νpos,k. The measurement matrix used
to extract position states for the innovation computation is
Hpos =
I3×3
03×9

. An adaptive noise model is applied
to position updates, when the horizontal innovation exceeds
a threshold, the measurement covariance Rpos,k increases to
down-weight outlier measurements.
2) Velocity Update: Velocity measurements zvel,k ∈R3
are incorporated using the measurement matrix Hvel =
03×3
I3×3
03×6

.
3) Heading Update: A magnetometer heading measure-
ment zhead,k = ψmag,k (converted to radians) is used to
mitigate yaw drift through the measurement matrix Hhead =
01×8
1
01×3

. The yaw innovation is mapped to (−π, π]
to handle angle discontinuities.
F. EKF Algorithm
The recursive estimation process consists of two stages:
prediction and update.
1) Prediction Step: First, the state estimate Xk|k−1 and
error covariance Pk|k−1 are computed using the process
model f(·) and its Jacobian Fk as
ˆ
Xk|k−1 = f( ˆ
Xk−1|k−1, uk),
(3)
Pk|k−1 = FkPk−1|k−1F T
k + Qk,
(4)
where Qk is the process noise covariance matrix.
2) Update Step: Upon receiving the measurement vector
zk, the innovation ˜yk and its covariance Sk are calculated
˜yk = zk −h( ˆ
Xk|k−1),
(5)
Sk = HkPk|k−1HT
k + Rk,
(6)
where h(·) is the measurement function, Hk is the measure-
ment Jacobian, and Rk is the measurement noise covariance.
The Kalman gain Kk is then derived as Kk = Pk|k−1HT
k S−1
k .
Finally, the posterior state estimate Xk|k and error covariance
Pk|k are updated
ˆ
Xk|k = ˆ
Xk|k−1 + Kk˜yk,
(7)
Pk|k = (I −KkHk)Pk|k−1.
(8)
G. Transformer-based Physics-informed Model
A sequence of Transformer encoder blocks, compris-
ing layer normalization, multi-head self-attention, and feed-
forward layers, is employed to model temporal correlations
in the input sequences. The proposed neural network model
follows a two-branch design, where the first branch com-
putes continuous 3D trajectory forecasts, while the second
branch performs discrete UAV state classification. Positional
encoding is applied to preserve sequence ordering, and time-
distributed fully connected layers are used to map the en-
coded features to the required outputs (trajectory prediction
and state classification).
To enhance trajectory prediction performance by imple-
menting physical motion constraints, a physics-informed loss
module is introduced within the Transformer-based architec-
ture. This loss component augments the standard trajectory
mean-squared error (MSE) with additional physics-based
and axis-dependent penalty terms, implemented through a
weighted multi-component formulation with scaling coeffi-
cients. The resulting physics-informed objective comprises
four main components, as summarized below.
Physics-informed trajectory loss: First, a weighted mean-
squared error (wMSE) is computed over the predicted 3D
positions, where the vertical component is emphasized to
better capture altitude variations
wMSE =
1
NT
N
X
i=1
T
X
k=1
h
(˜px)2 + (˜py)2 + 10(˜pz)2i
,
(9)
where ˜px = (pxi,k −ˆpxi,k), ˜py = (pyi,k −ˆpyi,k), ˜pz =
(pzi,k −ˆpzi,k), N denotes the batch size, T is the prediction
horizon, and k the current sampling index (time-step) while
(pxi,k, pyi,k, pzi,k) and (ˆpxi,k, ˆpyi,k, ˆpzi,k) are the ground-
truth and predicted positions, respectively.
Next, kinematic quantities, such as velocity and accelera-
tion, are computed from the predicted trajectory using finite
differences with sampling interval ∆k
ˆvi,k = ˆpi,k −ˆpi,k−1
∆k
,
ˆai,k = ˆvi,k −ˆvi,k−1
∆k
,
(10)
where ˆpi,k = [ˆpxi,k, ˆpyi,k, ˆpzi,k]⊤. A physics residual is then
defined as the deviation of the predicted acceleration from
gravity (assuming no thrust measurement is available), with
g = 9.81 m/s2
Rphys =
1
N(T −2)
N
X
i=1
T
X
k=3


ˆai,k −[0, 0, −g]⊤

2
2.
(11)
The gravity-consistency residual in Eq. (11) is applied only
to flight segments in which thrust variations are minimal
(e.g., IDLE-HOVER and low-acceleration motion). For ma-
neuvering modes (e.g., ASCEND, DESCEND, and TURN),
the residual is down-weighted by applying class-conditional
weighting using ground-truth mode labels during training.
To further improve robustness to outliers and separately
control vertical and horizontal accuracy, mean absolute error
(MAE) penalty terms are introduced on the altitude (pzk) and
the planar coordinates (pxk and pyk)
1423
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:06:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
ZMAE =
1
NT
N
X
i=1
T
X
k=1
˜pz
,
(12)
XYMAE =
1
NT
N
X
i=1
T
X
k=1
|˜px| + |˜py|
.
(13)
The final trajectory loss is the weighted sum of the
aforementioned terms, where λphys, αz, and βxy are scalar
coefficients used to balance physics residual and the MAE
penalty terms
Ltraj = wMSE + λphys Rphys + αz ZMAE + βxy XYMAE.
(14)
Finally, the overall multi-task objective combines the
trajectory loss with the binary cross-entropy loss [31] for
state classification using equal weights
L = 0.5 Ltraj + 0.5 LBCE.
(15)
The training procedure employs a neural network model
checkpoint to save the weights achieving the minimum
validation loss, and early stopping to terminate optimization
when the validation loss fails to improve for a specified
number of epochs. Flight telemetry obtained through the
PSDK is logged to a database for offline labeling and
subsequent analysis. Each time step is annotated into one
of five flight modes [IDLE-HOVER, ASCEND, DESCEND,
TURN, or HMSL (horizontal movement straight line)] using
threshold rules for altitude deviation, yaw rate, and horizontal
displacement. The labeled time series are then converted
into overlapping input–output pairs using a sliding-window
scheme. For example, the proposed EMT-TPI employs a
sliding window of 120 samples (12 s at 0.1 s time intervals)
and predicts the look-ahead horizon of 120 samples (12 s) for
both 3D trajectory forecasting and the corresponding flight-
mode sequence (state classification). It must be noted that for
the proposed onboard system, a pre-trained EMT-TPI model
is exported to ONNX for low-latency onboard inference [32].
IV. EMT-TPI ALGORITHM
Algorithm 1 summarizes the proposed EMT-TPI pro-
cessing framework for UAV trajectory prediction and state
classification using EKF-assisted, physics-informed learning
in GNSS-denied conditions. Initially, multi-modal measure-
ments (onboard inertial sensing and vision-derived data) are
fused through an EKF to form an augmented, uncertainty-
aware state estimate, which is then organized as an input
sequence together with multi-class flight-mode labels. A
sliding-window scheme, parameterized by the input size
(IS), window size (WS), and prediction look-ahead size
(HS), reshapes the training procedure’s samples that are
subsequently split into training, validation, and test sets.
The resulting sequences are used to train the multi-task
Transformer model configured with selected hyperparameters
and optimized using a physics-informed trajectory loss in
conjunction with a classification loss. The proposed system’s
performance is presented using the Euclidean distance error
between predicted and ground-truth positions and standard
class-wise metrics (Precision, Recall, and F1-score) for
flight-mode classification [33].
Algorithm 1 EMT-TPI Training and Onboard Inference Framework
Model Input: Onboard, external, and visual-odometry measurements pro-
cessed through EKF-based fusion
1: procedure (Model Initialization and Offline Training)
2:
Configuration of EMT-TPI neural network model hyperparameters
3:
Reshaping and normalization of data (input) sequences
4:
Training and validation using the EKF-assisted physics-informed
neural network model
5:
Model extraction to ONNX format for real-time inference
6: end procedure
7: procedure (Online Data Acquisition and Inference)
8:
Sensor measurement collection with the use of PSDK
9:
Visual odometry computation using the camera stream
10:
EKF sensor fusion
11:
if Drone has landed then
12:
UAV operation completed
13:
else
14:
Store data into the system’s database
15:
Feed the collected data to the EMT-TPI model
16:
EMT-TPI inference using the EKF-augmented input sequence
17:
end if
18: end procedure
Model Output: Future UAV 3D trajectory and flight-state predictions
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Hardware Configuration
Data collection and experimental evaluation are conducted
using the DJI Matrice 300 RTK or 350 RTK platforms,
selected for their compatibility with onboard development
and payload integration. Both UAVs are equipped with a
DJI Zenmuse H20T camera to support vision-based mea-
surements (e.g., for visual odometry) and an NVIDIA Jet-
son Xavier NX module to execute the proposed onboard
software in real time, with an average measured end-to-
end onboard latency (measured runtime) of 150 ms. Using
DJI’s PSDK, the Jetson interfaces directly with the UAV
telemetry and sensor streams, while an external TriSonica
Mini wind and weather sensor provides wind speed and
direction measurements for enhanced situational awareness.
The overall hardware configuration is depicted in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2: EMT-TPI hardware onboard configuration: (a) UAV
agent, (b) Embedded processing unit, (c) E-Port module.
1424
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:06:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
B. Data Acquisition and Annotation
The dataset used in this work is publicly available on
Zenodo and is collected using the proposed system prototype,
referred to as Dataset-1 [34]. Dataset-1 encompasses 18
unique real-world drone 3D flights, amounting to roughly
15 minutes of flight time per mission and a total of 111,082
entries. The dataset is divided into 65% for training, 15% for
validation, and 20% for testing purposes. Dataset-1 includes
a broad set of drone sensor features, as can be seen in
Fig. 3, but also incorporates outputs from the EKF, providing
enhanced positional accuracy and additional estimation data.
Also, the dataset includes annotations for the UAV opera-
tional modes, facilitating the classification procedure.
Figure 3 depicts the feature correlation matrix of the input
features utilized by EMT-TPI, where warmer color variants
demonstrate positive correlation and cooler variants describe
negative correlation. As expected, strong correlations are ob-
served among localization variables, particularly between the
raw position components and their EKF-filtered counterparts
(e.g., position z with kalmanZ, and position x/position y
with kalmanLat/kalmanLong), confirming consistency be-
tween measured and filtered state representations. A second
correlated cluster appears in the attitude features, where
d roll and d pitch exhibit high mutual correlation, while
d yaw shows a noticeable correlation with heading, reflecting
the coupling between yaw dynamics and heading changes. In
contrast, wind-related variables wind speed and wind angle
exhibit weak correlation with most kinematic states, indi-
cating that they provide complementary information rather
than reproducing inertial/pose measurements. Overall, the
correlation matrix presents a feature set that supports robust
sensor fusion and improved generalization in GNSS-denied
scenarios.
Fig. 3: Feature Correlation Matrix.
C. Experimental Results
This section presents the experimental evaluation of the
EMT-TPI model. Its position prediction accuracy is assessed
by comparing the predicted trajectory against ground truth
(GT, obtained from GPS+RTK) data from Dataset-1. In
addition, the ability of the model to correctly identify the
state of the UAV is examined by comparing the UAV’s
predicted and actual states in a series of complex 3D flight
experiments. It is important to note that to evaluate GNSS-
denied performance, all GNSS measurements are excluded
from EMT-TPI inputs during inference and GPS+RTK is
used only to provide ground-truth reference trajectories for
evaluation purposes. Also, GPS+RTK geodetic coordinates
(latitude, longitude, altitude) are mapped to a local East-
North-Up (ENU) frame by converting latitude and longitude
with the use of a Haversine-based approximation with respect
to a reference origin, while altitude is used directly for the
Up component (therefore all errors are evaluated in meters).
Specifically, a physics-informed Transformer network is
implemented in Keras/TensorFlow to perform multi-step tra-
jectory forecasting and flight-mode classification. The model
operates at a sampling interval of ∆k = 0.1 s and uses a
fixed historical context window of WS=120 samples (12 s)
to predict a future horizon of HS=120 steps (12 s). Input fea-
tures consist of 22 telemetry features (wind speed/direction,
battery voltage/current, attitude quaternion, linear and angu-
lar velocities, linear accelerations, ESC speed/voltage, com-
manded roll/pitch/yaw rates, and heading) augmented with
Kalman filter outputs kalmanLat, kalmanLong, kalmanZ. To
prevent leakage, the dataset is split by flight ID into 65%
training and 15% validation sets, with sequences sorted by
seq (sequence ID) or timestamp prior to window extraction.
Also, it must be noted that the testing phase is conducted
on experimental trials that were not included in the training
and validation phase. The network consists of two parallel
Transformer encoder branches (trajectory and classification),
each formed by Nattn=6 stacked self-attention blocks with
sinusoidal positional encoding. Each block uses multi-head
self-attention with nh=6 heads and key dimension dk=64,
followed by a feed-forward sublayer of width dff=512,
residual connections, layer normalization, and a dropout rate
of 0.1 is applied to the attention output. The trajectory branch
produces 3D position predictions through a time-distributed
linear layer, and the classification branch outputs estimates
for the five flight states (IDLE-HOVER, ASCEND, TURN,
HMSL, DESCEND) using a time-distributed sigmoid layer.
Training uses the Adam optimizer (with learning rate 10−4),
batch size 64, and early stopping (with patience 15 epochs).
The multi-task objective combines a physics-informed tra-
jectory loss and binary cross-entropy classification loss with
weights 0.5 and 0.5, respectively. For state classification,
one logit per state is learned using sigmoid activations and
binary cross-entropy on one-hot targets, while a single state
is selected at each time step through argmax. The trajectory
loss includes an axis-weighted MSE term, a physics residual
regularizer with scalar coefficient λphys = 0.03 , and addi-
tional MAE penalties on the vertical and lateral components
with scalar weights αz=20 and βxy=12.
The trajectory loss during 50 training epochs is illustrated
in Fig. 4, where both training and validation loss converge
within the first 10 epochs and stabilize near 1.0, demonstrat-
ing consistent generalization performance.
Table I describes the average Euclidean positional er-
ror (under a GNSS-denied input setting where only on-
board inertial, vision, and external sensor measurements
are utilized) over a 12 s forecast horizon (WS=120),
comparing the proposed EMT-TPI against complementary
learning- and filtering-based baseline techniques [data-driven
(conventional) Transformer (e.g., MTLF-FVO), LSTM, and
VO+EKF, using the same configuration parameters and re-
source constraints]. Compared to GNSS-dependent solutions,
EMT-TPI performs GNSS-denied trajectory prediction (over
1425
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:06:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.7]
Fig. 4: EMT-TPI loss curve.
TABLE I: Average Euclidean distance error for trajectory
prediction using WS=120 and HS=120.
Time
(s)
EMT-
TPI
EMT-
TPI-NE
MTLF-
FVO
MTLF-
FVO-NE
LSTM
VO+EKF
t+1
5.96
7.33
7.94
10.65
17.91
15.57
t+2
5.71
6.95
7.80
10.44
17.24
–
t+3
5.89
6.93
7.66
10.53
16.59
–
t+4
5.97
6.88
7.62
10.31
16.05
–
t+5
6.16
6.80
7.77
10.14
15.71
–
t+6
6.13
6.93
7.90
10.18
15.56
–
t+7
6.10
7.09
7.86
10.15
15.61
–
t+8
6.37
7.13
7.97
10.16
15.86
–
t+9
6.64
7.18
8.15
10.30
16.23
–
t+10
6.91
7.36
8.37
10.50
16.85
–
t+11
7.33
7.55
8.74
10.64
19.09
–
t+12
7.90
8.12
9.02
10.98
21.01
–
long-horizon) by employing an EKF-assisted Transformer
architecture, where the EKF fuses onboard inertial and vision
measurements to produce an uncertainty-aware state estimate
that is subsequently utilized by the proposed system for
location estimation (with GPS+RTK used exclusively as
ground truth only for evaluation purposes). Across all pre-
diction steps, EMT-TPI achieves higher location estimation
performance, ranging from 5.96 m at t+1 and 5.71 m at
t+2 to 7.90 m at t+12. In comparison, MTLF-FVO exhibits
consistently larger errors (e.g., 7.94 m at t+1 and 9.02 m
at t+12), while the no-EKF (NE) variants further degrade
performance (e.g., 10.65 m at t+1 and 10.98 m at t+12
for MTLF-FVO-NE). The LSTM baseline exhibits degraded
performance across the horizon, increasing from 17.91 m
at t+1 to 21.01 m at t+12. Finally, the VO+EKF baseline
is presented only for the one-step prediction (t+1 as EKF
is not a horizon forecaster), where it achieves 15.57 m
error, highlighting that standalone recursive filtering is not
sufficient for accurate long-horizon forecasting and motivat-
ing the proposed EKF-assisted Transformer integration for
GNSS-denied UAV trajectory prediction.
Furthermore, Fig. 5 illustrates the cumulative distribution
function (CDF) of the Euclidean distance error for the pre-
dicted trajectories. The results demonstrate that the proposed
system (EMT-TPI) can achieve accurate location estimation
in a GNSS-denied environment with a 50th percentile error
of 6.875 m. Also, the error increases gradually at higher
percentiles, reaching 11.81 m at the 80th percentile and
19.27 m at the 95th percentile, highlighting the worst-case
deviations observed across the evaluation procedure.
Figure 6 illustrates mean absolute error (MAE) of EMT-
TPI over a forecast horizon of 12 s, where the x-, y-,
and z-axes represent the local ENU frame coordinates. As
depicted, EMT-TPI achieves an MAE of 1.3 m on the z-
axis and 2.53 m on the y-axis, while the x-axis error is 3.51
m, demonstrating higher uncertainty in vertical prediction
Fig. 5: Average CDF error for predicted trajectories.
compared with lateral motion.
Fig. 6: MAE along x, y, z axes compared to GT.
The 3D flight-path prediction results, as shown in Fig. 7,
present two different flight path scenarios (maneuvering and
complex UAV flight path trajectory). In each case, the esti-
mated trajectory (red) closely follows the GPS+RTK ground
truth (blue), demonstrating accurate trajectory prediction.
Trajectory differences (between estimated and ground truth
trajectories) are mainly observed during sharp turns and
rapid vertical transitions. Overall, the strong overlap between
the predicted and ground-truth trajectories showcases that
the proposed approach can accurately reconstruct 3D UAV
motion with limited drift over a long forecast horizon, even
without the employment of GNSS measurements.
To assess multi-label classification performance, Precision,
Recall, F1-score, and macro- and weighted-average metrics
are calculated for each model (Table II). The proposed EMT-
TPI achieves higher overall classification performance than
MTLF-FVO, with a higher macro-average F1 score (0.79
vs. 0.67) and a higher weighted-average F1 score (0.80
vs. 0.76), indicating improved balance across classes as
well as stronger support-weighted performance. These results
demonstrate that EMT-TPI provides a more accurate and
reliable overall state classification compared to MTLF-FVO.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This work presents EMT-TPI, a real-time onboard multi-
task framework that integrates a Transformer architecture
with EKF-assisted multi-modal sensor fusion and a physics-
informed training objective to jointly perform UAV state
classification and trajectory prediction over a specified look-
ahead horizon in GNSS-denied environments. Specifically,
the EKF fuses onboard inertial telemetry with vision-based
optical-flow measurements as well as weather station mea-
surements to create an augmented measurement vector,
which is then processed by a physics-informed multi-task
Transformer to enforce motion consistency and therefore im-
prove prediction robustness and performance. The proposed
1426
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:06:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.8]
Fig. 7: 3D flight path prediction results compared to the GT:
(top) Maneuvering flight path, (bottom) Complex flight path.
TABLE II: Class-wise metrics for 12 s look-ahead (WS =
120 samples) of EMT-TPI vs. MTLF-FVO.
State
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Neural Network Model: EMT-TPI
IDLE-HOVER
0.81
0.71
0.75
ASCEND
0.87
0.91
0.89
TURN
0.85
0.68
0.76
HMSL
0.82
0.90
0.85
DESCEND
0.62
0.84
0.71
Macro-avg
0.79
0.81
0.79
Weighted-avg
0.81
0.81
0.80
Neural Network Model: MTLF-FVO
IDLE-HOVER
0.76
0.69
0.73
ASCEND
0.74
0.88
0.80
TURN
0.74
0.52
0.61
HMSL
0.83
0.82
0.82
DESCEND
0.28
0.67
0.39
Macro-avg
0.67
0.72
0.67
Weighted-avg
0.78
0.75
0.76
EMT-TPI is trained and validated on a custom real-world
dataset that consists of complex outdoor flight trajectories
across different altitudes and long ranges, and provides an
average trajectory prediction error of 6.875 m over a 12 s pre-
diction horizon (without GNSS measurement information)
and an F1-score of 0.79 for state classification. The overall
onboard prototype is extensively evaluated in outdoor flight
experiments, demonstrating performance close to the ground
truth and reliable real-time operation, making it suitable for
critical UAV missions.
Future work will examine the integration of additional
sensing modalities to further improve performance and will
expand the training dataset to strengthen both state classifi-
cation and trajectory prediction capabilities.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Shakhatreh et al., “Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs): A survey on
civil applications and key research challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 48 572–48 634, 2019.
[2] I. Jarraya et al., “GNSS-denied unmanned aerial vehicle navigation:
Analyzing computational complexity, sensor fusion, and localization
methodologies,” Satellite Navigation, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 9, 2025.
[3] D. Avola et al., “UAV geo-localization for navigation: A survey,” IEEE
Access, vol. 12, pp. 125 332–125 357, 2024.
[4] M. Corbetta et al., “Real-time UAV trajectory prediction for safety
monitoring in low-altitude airspace,” in Proc. Aviation Forum, 2019.
[5] S. Waharte and N. Trigoni, “Supporting search and rescue operations
with UAVs,” in Proc. IEEE EST, 2010, pp. 142–147.
[6] P. Shu et al., “Trajectory prediction of UAV based on LSTM,” in Proc.
ICBASE, 2021, pp. 448–451.
[7] K. Xiao, et al., “Trajectory prediction of UAV in smart city using
recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[8] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017.
[9] Q. Tong et al., “Long-term trajectory prediction model based on
Transformer,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 143 695–143 703, 2023.
[10] A. Perrusqu´ıa and W. Guo, “Reservoir computing for drone trajectory
intent prediction: A physics informed approach,” IEEE Trans. Cybern.,
vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 4939–4948, 2024.
[11] N. Souli et al., “An onboard UAV multi-task system for trajectory
prediction and state estimation employing Transformer-and Reservoir-
based networks,” ACM Journal on Autonomous Transportation Sys-
tems, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 1–33, 2025.
[12] ——, “A Transformer-based physics-informed network for trajectory
prediction and state estimation,” in Proc. IEEE ISC2, 2025, pp. 1–6.
[13] C. Wang et al., “A dynamics-enhanced learning model for multi-
horizon trajectory prediction in autonomous vehicles,” Information
Fusion, vol. 118, p. 102924, 2025.
[14] Y. Grigoriou et al., “UAV state estimation and trajectory prediction
using Transformer-based neural networks and feature-based visual
odometry,” in Proc. IEEE SMC, 2025, pp. 206–213.
[15] H. Durrant-Whyte and T. Bailey, “Simultaneous localization and
mapping: part I,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 13, no. 2, 2006.
[16] C. Forster et al., “SVO: Fast semi-direct monocular visual odometry,”
in Proc. IEEE ICRA, 2014, pp. 15–22.
[17] A. Loquercio et al., “DroNet: Learning to fly by driving,” IEEE
Robotics & Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 1088–1095, 2018.
[18] R. W. Beard and T. W. McLain, Small Unmanned Aircraft: Theory
and Practice.
Princeton University Press, 2012.
[19] A. M. Sabatini, “Quaternion-based extended Kalman filter for deter-
mining orientation by inertial and magnetic sensing,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 1346–1356, 2006.
[20] S. Weiss et al., “Real-time onboard visual-inertial state estimation and
self-calibration of MAVs in unknown environments,” in Proc. IEEE
ICRA, 2012, pp. 957–964.
[21] T. Qin et al., “VINS-Mono: A robust and versatile monocular visual-
inertial state estimator,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 34, no. 4, 2018.
[22] M. Bloesch et al., “Robust visual inertial odometry using a direct
EKF-based approach,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ IROS, 2015, pp. 298–304.
[23] K. Zhang et al., “Trajectory prediction for autonomous driving using
spatial-temporal graph attention Transformer,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 22 343–22 353, 2022.
[24] J. Ren et al., “Long-term trajectory prediction of hypersonic glide
vehicle based on physics-informed Transformer,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp.
Electron. Syst., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 9551–9561, 2023.
[25] M. Geng et al., “A physics-informed Transformer model for vehicle
trajectory prediction on highways,” Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Tech-
nol., vol. 154, p. 104272, 2023.
[26] R. Caruana, “Multitask learning,” Machine Learning, vol. 28, 1997.
[27] S. Ruder, “An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural net-
works,” arXiv:1706.05098 [cs.LG], 2017.
[28] A. Palamas et al., “A multi-task learning framework for drone state
identification and trajectory prediction,” in Proc. IEEE DCOSS-IoT,
2023, pp. 676–683.
[29] R. Hartley and A. Zisserman, Multiple View Geometry in Computer
Vision.
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[30] R. Szeliski, Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications. Springer,
2022.
[31] P.-T. De Boer et al., “A tutorial on the cross-entropy method,” Annals
of operations research, vol. 134, no. 1, pp. 19–67, 2005.
[32] F. Xu, “Faster scalable ML model deployment using ONNX and open
source tools,” in Proc. IEEE Infrastructure Conference, 2020.
[33] F. P. Moreno et al., “Prediction of air traffic complexity through a
dynamic complexity indicator and machine learning models,” J. Air
Transp. Manag., vol. 119, p. 102632, 2024.
[34] Y. Grigoriou et al., “Drone onboard multi-modal sensor and feature-
based visual odometry dataset for complex outdoor scenarios,” Mar.
2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15089283
1427
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:06:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
