warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0469.pdf
sha256: 2056F0B09BDB6851CEBF01745B7FFEA95586F2103459CC73CF362EB9F6712BB4
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 11
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
This may be the author’s version of a work that was submitted/accepted
for publication in the following source:
Ng, Michael, Vanegas Alvarez, Fernando, Morton, Kye, Sandino, Juan, &
Gonzalez, Luis Felipe
(2022)
Design and Flight Test of an Aerial Manipulator for Applications in GPS-
Denied Environments.
In Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Unmanned Air-
craft Systems (ICUAS).
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., United States of
America, pp. 20-29.
This ﬁle was downloaded from: https://eprints.qut.edu.au/234552/
© 2022 IEEE
© 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be
obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing
this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for
resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this
work in other works.
License: Creative Commons: Attribution-Noncommercial 4.0
Notice: Please note that this document may not be the Version of Record
(i.e. published version) of the work. Author manuscript versions (as Sub-
mitted for peer review or as Accepted for publication after peer review) can
be identiﬁed by an absence of publisher branding and/or typeset appear-
ance. If there is any doubt, please refer to the published source.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICUAS54217.2022.9836060
[p.2]
 
Design and Flight Test of an Aerial Manipulator for Applications in 
GPS-Denied Environments  
M. Ng1, F. Vanegas1, K. Morton1, J. Sandino1 and F. Gonzalez1 
Abstract 
– 
Research 
and 
development 
of 
aerial 
manipulators has gained interest over the past few years. The 
incorporation of manipulator mechanisms into UAVs can 
expand the realm of applications for these vehicles in 
challenging scenarios where it is not safe for personnel to carry 
out the work. Examples of such missions and applications 
include collecting chemical samples, exploration and interaction 
with foreign objects, high rise building inspection and spray 
painting. With the growing interest to collect samples and 
interact with remote environments autonomously, most aerial 
manipulators use GPS or indoor tracking systems. However, an 
aerial manipulator capable of interacting safely with the 
environment in a GPS-denied environment using only on-board 
sensors is still a challenge. Related work on the use of and 
localization of UAVs in GPS-denied environments is increasing, 
however the integration of an aerial manipulator on a UAV 
operating in GPS-denied environments is still limited.  This 
paper presents the design, build and implementation of an UAV 
with a robotic arm for use in GPS-denied environments. The 
aerial manipulator features a lightweight and robust design 
consisting of aluminium joints, carbon tubing and 3D printed 
linkages. The implemented aerial manipulation system presents 
a versatile and modular design which allows easy modification 
such as adjusting the linkage lengths to accommodate different 
reachability requirements and supports various multirotor 
configurations. Videos of the hover experiment can be found at: 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLTkv8838qsQGW7JX
l3kMfZ20rwmxUHfl5  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Missions such as collecting samples exploration and 
interaction with foreign objects are important for the 
advancement of science and engineering in the techno-socio-
economic climate. Historically, tasks such as sample 
collection or interaction have been limited to requiring a form 
of human interaction or a simple statically mounted device. 
With the growing interest to collect samples and interact with 
environments autonomously, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
(UAV) have been a popular choice for these tasks. However, 
there is an inability for the UAV to complete these tasks by 
itself. This limitation can be overcome by using a robotic 
manipulator in parallel with a UAV which is known as aerial 
manipulation.    
In existing solutions and literature, it has become 
prevalent that there are several limitations of aerial 
manipulation. A notable limitation is the significant impact 
to the control and dynamics of the system when an object is 
grasped or when the manipulator is actuated.  This is caused 
by the large moment forces induced on the manipulator base 
(UAV base) and must be accounted for to ensure precise and 
stable flight. Another constraint is the design of a controller 
for the system. Given that the manipulator is mounted on a 
free flying base, the system is highly non-linear and regular 
control methods would not be sufficient. 
Collection or manipulation of objects in remote or 
unknown environments such as bushland, mountains, gullies 
and GPS-denied environments can be dangerous to 
personnel. The use of a small to medium sized UAV in 
parallel with a robotic manipulator allows for navigation and 
manipulation in these environments without exposing 
personnel to the risks. Aerial manipulation design systems 
can also prove to be more capable than single-bodied systems 
given their additional degrees of freedom.   
The objective of this paper is to develop and demonstrate 
the use an UAV in parallel with a robotic manipulator in 
GPS-denied environments. Therefore, the desired outcome of 
this paper is to be able to fly to a desired location, interact 
with an object and return to the starting point. However, 
translating the research into a working prototype will incur 
limitations and constraints and therefore challenges to the 
solution. Notable challenges include: (a) The impact to the 
control and dynamics of the system when the manipulator is 
actuated; (b) The ability to accurately manipulate an object in 
GPS-denied environments. This paper aims to address these 
challenges and create a real-world solution. 
II. BACKGROUND 
Robotic grasping also known as robotic manipulation is 
the use of a robotic mechanism to perform tasks which 
involve object manipulation, sensing and positioning. For 
tasks such as collecting samples in remote or unknown 
environments, robotic manipulators are often used in parallel 
with an autonomous vehicle. These autonomous vehicles 
equipped with a robotic manipulator, such as the Mars 
Perseverance Rover, are described as mobile manipulators. 
Additionally, when a robotic manipulator is mounted on an 
UAV, it is referred to as an aerial manipulator. A conference 
article by Korpela et at. (2011) notes that while regular 
mobile manipulators can facilitate human interaction with 
many unfamiliar environments, they are significantly limited 
to the terrain and environment. An aerial manipulator, 
however, can operate in “free space” and therefore can 
provide significant mobility advantages [1].  
1 School of Electrical Engineering and Robotics, Faculty of Engineering, 
Queensland University of Technology, 2 George St Brisbane City QLD 
4000, Australia n9713891@qut.edu.au; f.vanegasalvarez@qut.edu.au; 
k6.morton@qut.edu.au; j.sandino@qut.edu.au; felipe.gonzalez@qut.edu.au 
[p.3]
 
One of the earliest encounters of aerial manipulation was 
in the 1950s where helicopters were used as the primary 
platform for manned aerial manipulation missions such as 
load transportation and power-line inspection [2]. Review of 
literature reveals that rotary-wing UAVs are the main 
platform for aerial manipulation where fixed-wing UAVs are 
not very common except for tasks such as mid-flight 
refuelling. Among rotary type UAVs, quadcopter and 
hexacopter remain the most commonly used platforms given 
their simplistic mechanical design, precise control schemes 
and highly desirable advantage of Vertical Take-Off and 
Landing (VTOL) [3].  
A common trend among literature is that the aerial 
platform type and weight which the robotic manipulator is 
mounted on is a dependent factor for how much payload 
weight can be carried. For example, in table I, a quadcopter 
of 900 grams has a maximum payload capacity of 450 grams 
whereas an hexacopter is able to carry up to 4.3 kg.  
TABLE I 
 UAVS FROM DIFFERENT SOURCES WITH THEIR 
RESPECTIVE WEIGHT AND PAYLOAD CAPACITY. 
UAV Type 
UAV Weight 
Payload Capacity 
Quadcopter [4] 
900 g 
450 g 
Quadcopter [5] 
980 g 
600 g 
Hexacopter [6] 
2.5 kg 
4.32 kg 
Generally, there are two groups of manipulators: static 
manipulators, which is a manipulator that is connected to a 
fixed base such as the ground and mobile manipulators which 
is a manipulator that is connected to a mobile base such as a 
vehicle.   
An article by Ding et al. (2018) notes that manipulators 
on UAVs can be divided into four categories: robotic 
manipulators, grippers, tethers, and UAV body [7]. Robotic 
manipulators are the most common type for aerial 
manipulation tasks and compared to other methods, is the 
most suitable for complex tasks. The design of a robotic 
manipulator can vary vastly in terms degrees of freedom, 
number of links and reachability, however they can be 
categorized into two types of designs: an open loop, serial 
manipulator design and a closed-loop parallel manipulator 
design (Fig. 1).   
Among robotic manipulators and aerial manipulators, 
motors and servos are used in almost every situation to 
actuate the manipulator arm. However, in a study by Mishra 
(2020), it was found that the amount of torque a motor could 
produce was a limiting factor to how much weight could be 
moved [8]. An approach to address this challenge was 
examined by Plooij et al. (2012) where they used a parallel 
spring mechanism to reduce energy consumption and 
therefore reduce torque [9]. The results of their studies 
showed that for a 2 DOF prototype, an energy reduction of 
20% per stroke was achieved thus deeming it effective.  
  
Fig. 1. (left) Serial Manipulator diagram. (right) Parallel Manipulator 
diagram 
A study by Morton (2018) developed and simulated a 
control scheme to allow for trajectory-based tracking of a 
multirotor based aerial manipulator [10]. Using a low-level 
inverse dynamics controller, the robot was commanded to 
hover while the manipulator was put into different positions. 
The first test which tracked the robot base found there were 
small disturbances as the manipulator changes with a 
maximum end effector position error of 0.01m. The second 
test which tracked the end effector instead found a maximum 
end effector position error of 0.07m, therefore indicating 
tracking the robot base was more precise.  
Another paper by Morton (2019) presented a control 
scheme for an autonomous aerial manipulator [11]. The main 
controller implemented consisted of a high-level trajectory 
control and a low-level attitude control. This control scheme 
was tested with an aerial manipulator with a 2 DOF arm 
picking up an object. This experiment found that the 
proposed control scheme was able to maintain stable 
operating conditions especially when the robot experienced 
changes to the inertial properties of the system.  
III. KINEMATICS 
A. Inverse Kinematics  
This section presents the derivations of the inverse 
kinematic models. Fig. 2 shows a diagram of a two-link robot 
arm where the lengths and angles of links 1 and 2 are defined 
as 𝑙1 & 𝑙2 and 𝜃1 & 𝜃2 respectively. The global reference 
frame of the robot arm is defined as 𝑋𝑂 and 𝑌𝑂 and the x and 
y coordinate of the end effector is defined as 𝑃𝑥 and 𝑃𝑦.  
 
Fig. 2. Coordinate frame for a 2-link robot arm.  
[p.4]
 
The purpose of inverse kinematics is to find a function 
which takes the coordinates of the end effector in the world 
reference frame (𝑋𝑂, 𝑌𝑂) and computes the manipulator 
angles 𝜃1 and 𝜃2. To calculate 𝜃1 and 𝜃2, the basis of 
Pythagorean Theorem is applied.  
Firstly, using Pythagorean Theorem, the distance of the 
end effector from the world reference frame is calculated.  
𝑧= 𝑝𝑥
2 + 𝑝𝑦
2 
(1)  
To determine the components used to find 𝜃1,  the 
components used to find 𝜃2 must be calculated first. Given 
the inverse tan function will be used, the 𝑥 component 𝑐2 and 
the 𝑦 component 𝑠2 is calculated:  
𝑐2 = 𝑧−𝑙1
2−𝑙2
2
𝑧∗𝑙1 ∗𝑙2
 
(2)  
𝑠2 = √1 −𝑐22 
(3)  
and the angle of link 2 can be found:  
𝜃2 = 𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑛2(𝑠2, 𝑐2) 
(4)  
Using the calculated values of 𝑐2 and 𝑠2, the angle of link 
two can be calculated by first finding the 𝑥 component 𝑐1 and 
the 𝑦 component 𝑠1.  
𝑐1 = 𝑝𝑥(𝑙1 + 𝑙2 ∗𝑐2) + 𝑙2 ∗𝑠2 ∗𝑝𝑦  
𝑧
 
(5)  
𝑠1 = 𝑝𝑦(𝑙1 + 𝑙2 ∗𝑐2) + 𝑙2 ∗𝑠2 ∗𝑝𝑥  
𝑧
 
(6)  
and the angle of link 1 can be found:  
𝜃1 = 𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑛2(𝑠1, 𝑐1) 
(7)  
 
B. Forward Kinematics 
Forward kinematics involves calculating the coordinates 
of the end effector in the world reference frame (𝑋𝑂, 𝑌𝑂) with 
the link angles 𝜃1 and 𝜃2 as inputs. Forward kinematics are 
much easier to find than inverse and is already derived by 
many scholars such as Kosecka [12]. The final equations of 
forward kinematics of the 2-link manipulator are:   
[𝑥
𝑦] = [𝑙1 cos 𝜃1 + 𝑙2cos (θ1 + 𝜃2)
𝑙1 sin 𝜃1 + 𝑙2sin (θ1 + 𝜃2)] 
(8)  
Using the equation for forward kinematics (8) and the 
manipulator link lengths found in table II, the following 
forward kinematic reachability map is created. 
 
Fig. 3. Forward Kinematic Reachability map. 
This map was created in MATLAB using one-degree 
increments where each point on the map is one kinematic 
combination indicating that areas with a higher density of 
points indicate more kinematic combinations for that specific 
coordinate.  
IV. 
SYSTEM SETUP 
The hardware configuration of the aerial manipulator can 
be divided into two parts: the multirotor platform and the 
manipulator. The simplified system architecture of the 
system is shown in Fig. 4 where Fig. 5 shows a more detailed 
system architecture with the onboard hardware.   
 
Fig. 4. Simplified system architecture. 
A. Hardware setup 
The multirotor used in this set up is a S500 quadcopter 
which has a wheelbase of 480mm and weighs approximately 
935g [13]. The propulsion system of the quadcopter 
comprises four KV880 brushless motors which combined can 
have a maximum lift of 5.17 kg. The flight controller is a 
Pixhawk 4, and the companion computer used to control the 
manipulator arm is a Raspberry Pi 3B+.  
The hardware used to control the arm are two digital 
servos. To determine the size of the servos, static torque 
calculations were conducted on the basis that a 100g object 
would be manipulated and given that the robot arm would be 
moving, a 100% margin was considered for the dynamic 
[p.5]
 
torque. The servos are controlled and powered through the 
Raspberry Pi’s GPIO pins.  
The hardware of the manipulator itself consists of 
aluminium brackets, carbon tubing and custom 3D printed 
hubs. Table II below shows a summary specifications of the 
2-link robot arm where a side and top view CAD drawing of 
the arm is shown in Fig. 6 and 7.  
TABLE II 
 MANIPULATOR SPECIFICATIONS. 
Part 
Length 
Angle 
Weight 
Link 1 
0.12 m 
0° ≤ θ1 ≤ 180° 
137 g 
Link 2 
0.14 m 
0° ≤ θ2 ≤ 180° 
76 g 
End Effector  
0.064 m 
N/A 
50 g 
 
 
Fig. 6. Side view of the robotic manipulator. 
When integrating the robotic manipulator with the 
quadcopter, a major consideration is the weight distribution 
and the Centre of Gravity (CoG). The goal when designing 
the aerial manipulator is to have the centre of gravity close to 
the centre of the system as this will reduce unwanted stability 
effects when flying. The manipulator mounted to the bottom 
of the quadcopter brings the CoG down. To counteract this, 
the battery is placed on the top plate for means to bring the 
CoG back to the centre. Also, given that the robot 
manipulator will be forward most of the time, the battery is 
placed slightly back from the horizontal centre. The full setup 
of the manipulator mounted onto the quadcopter is seen in 
Fig. 8 below.  
 
Fig. 7. Top view of the robotic manipulator. 
 
Fig. 8. The fully assembled aerial manipulator.  
 
Fig. 5. Detailed hardware system architecture. 
[p.6]
 
B. Software Setup 
The Raspberry Pi which is used to control the manipulator 
runs Ubuntu server 20.04 and ROS Noetic. The Robotic 
Operating System (ROS) is used to interface each subsystem 
with each other through publishing and subscribing data.  
This allows a modular software framework to be built. 
Furthermore, python is the programming language used for 
coding the servo motors.  
V. RESULTS 
Three tests conducted to analyse the performance of the 
theoretical framework and design framework. These tests 
include a hover test, sample retrieval test and object retrieval 
test. 
A. Hover test 
The hover test involves no waypoint flying and it aims to 
determine the effect of manipulator movements on the UAV. 
This hover test is further broken down into three separate 
tests: 
1. 
The first hover test is to analyse how manipulator 
movements affect Centre of Mass (CoM). 
2. 
The second hover test evaluates how the manipulator 
movements will affect the flight stability of the UAV. 
3. 
The third hover test is the same as the second hover test, 
however, instead of using VICON positioning, it uses 
tracking data from the Realsense camera.  
 
All experiments will perform a steady hover with the 
same manipulator movements. The UAV is commanded to 
hover at a height of 1m, and the manipulator is moved 
between three different positions. These three positions 
(extend, back, reach) can be seen in Fig. 11. Between the 
three positions, the four manipulator combinations tested are 
as follows: 
• 
Reach → Extend [A] 
• 
Extend → Back [B] 
• 
Back → Extend [C] 
• 
Extend → Reach [D] 
1)  Hover Test 1- The positional error of this experiment 
is seen in Fig. 9. In all experiments, the robot was 
commanded to hover at a specific location. However, the first 
experiment aims to evaluate the effects on the CoM when the 
manipulator is actuated. To prevent the UAV from self-
correcting its position using the VICON system, the 
maximum horizontal speed was set to 0 m/s. Therefore, any 
‘drifting’ of the UAV would be caused by changes to the 
CoM from manipulator movements.  
As expected, combination A (reach to extend) and B 
(extend to back) cause the CoM to shift backwards. As a 
result, the UAV can be seen to drift backwards where the x-
position is seen to drift up to 0.65m from is trajectory 
reference. However, during combination C (back to extend) 
and D (extend to reach), the CoM is bought forward again, 
and its position is seen to stabilise. It can also be observed 
from the y-position graph that there is a slight drift in the 
lateral axis with a maximum error of 0.07m. This shows that 
the manipulator movements mainly affect the CoM in the 
longitudinal axis and has little effect on the lateral axis.  
 
Fig. 9. Position error of the robot base (hover test 1). Dashed line 
represents trajectory reference, and the solid line represents measured 
position. 
 
 
Fig. 10. Position error of the robot base (hover test 2). Dashed line represents 
trajectory reference, and the solid line represents measured position. 
2)  Hover Test 2- The positional error of this experiment 
is seen in Fig. 10. The second experiment aims to evaluate 
the effects on flight stability when the manipulator is moved. 
Since, this test is to purely analyse flight stability, the UAV 
[p.7]
 
is permitted to correct its position. As such, the UAV will 
only need to compensate for the torquing moments.  
 
Comparing the results of test 1 and test 2, it can be 
observed that the horizontal position correction was 
successful with the robot maintaining a stable hover at the 
reference location. Small disruptions are present in the 
longitudinal axis (x-position) with a maximum error of 
0.046m occurring during combination C (back to extend). 
With the manipulator only moving in the longitudinal axis, it 
was expected that there would be almost no lateral error. The 
results matched the expectations with a maximum error of 
0.015m observed.   
3) Hover Test 3- The third hover experiment aims to 
evaluate the effects on flight stability when the manipulator 
is moved. However, unlike the second hover experiment, the 
UAV uses the Realsense camera rather than the VICON 
system to determine its position. Similar to the previous 
experiment, this test is to analyse flight stability and the UAV 
is permitted to correct its position.  
The results of the position error for this test is seen in Fig. 
12. Comparing the results of test 2 and test 3 it can be 
observed that the position correction with the Realsense 
camera is not as effective as the VICON system such that 
while the Realsense was able to correct the UAV-AM 
position, there are more disturbances present. This is evident 
in comparing the positional error in the x-axis as this hover 
test without VICON showed maximum errors 0.06m 
compared to 0.046m from test 2. Additionally, in the y-axis 
and z-axis it is evident that there are more oscillations in the 
position error in this test compared to the previous test. 
Overall, this matches expectations that flight using methods 
of navigation in GPS-denied environments is not as accurate 
as indoor position systems such as VICON.  
4)  Analysis- From the results of test 1, it was found that 
changes to the manipulator configurations will significantly 
impact the CoM of the system. Use of position correction 
through methods of navigation can be used to eliminate the 
drift caused by changes to the CoM. However, this is related 
to navigation systems and is outside the scope of the report.  
 
Fig. 12. Position error of the robot base (hover test 3). Dashed line represents 
trajectory reference, and the solid line represents measured position. 
The object to be manipulated has a diameter of 26mm and 
with the gripper width of 30mm, there is only 4mm of 
tolerance to pick up the object. As such, the positioning of the 
end effector must be highly accurate. The maximum position 
error of 0.046m from test 2, indicates that the current error is 
not sufficient and should be reduced to be below 0.04m. This 
can be done by various methods, but two notable methods 
include controlling the speed of the manipulator movements 
by using control methods such a proportional-integral-
derivative (PID) controller or by simply changing the 
pseudocode to move the servos slower. 
Lastly, comparing the flight test with VICON to the flight 
test with the Realsense tracking camera, it was found that 
while VICON tracking results in steadier flight, the 
Realsense camera was still able to keep the position error 
below 0.1m. Ultimately, this showed that the Realsense 
 
 
 
(a) 
Manipulator in ‘Extend’ position 
Servo 1: 90 deg 
Servo 2: 180 deg 
Coordinate (x,z): (0 m , 0.3 m) 
(b) 
Manipulator in ‘Back’ position 
Servo 1: 45 deg 
Servo 2: 45 deg  
Coordinate (x,z): (0.095 m , 0.085 m) 
(c) 
Manipulator in ‘Reach’ position 
Servo 1: 135 deg 
Servo 2: 135 deg 
Coordinate (x,z): (0.265 m , 0.085 m) 
Fig. 11. Test 1 - Indoor VICON flight test with UAV hovering. 
[p.8]
 
camera is a precise and effective way to control the UAV-
AM position in GPS-denied environments.  
B. Sample Retrieval Test 
The sample retrieval flight test involves flying to a 
position and collecting a sample of water. The purpose of this 
flight test is to simulate a real-word scenario that a GPS-
denied aerial manipulator might have to perform. For 
example this sample collection mission could be framed as 
the UAV-AM being flown in a wilderness environment to 
collect a water sample from a lake. This mission consists of 
five phases: 
Phase 1 
 
Mission start: The UAV-AM takes off to 
1.25m above the origin (x=0m, y=0m, 
z=1.25m) (Fig. 13a).  
Phase 2 
Midpoint: Instead of flying directly to the 
target location, an intermediate guidance 
waypoint is used. This intermediate waypoint 
is set at 0.5m from the target to prevent the 
UAM-AM from overshooting the target 
waypoint (Fig. 13b). 
Phase 3 
Collection preparation: The target location is 
identified and the UAV-AM hovers directly 
above to target & the manipulator is extended 
(Fig. 13c, d). 
Phase 4 
Sample collection: The UAV-AM altitude is 
lowered from 1.25m to 1m and the vial is 
submerged in water. Next, the manipulator 
moves from the extend position to the stow 
position to ‘scoop’ the water (Fig. 13e) 
Phase 5 
Sample retrieval: The UAV-AM returns to its 
normal 1.5m altitude and begins flying back to 
the original point before landing (Fig. 13f).  
In this mission, it can be seen that the tub of water is 
placed on a table rather than the ground. This was done due 
to the constraints of the UAV-AM flight system software. 
Under the flight environment, the UAV-AM cannot fly too 
close to the ground as flying too close to the ground would 
cause the ‘grounding effect’ which is when the UAVs safety 
feature commands the UAV-AM to land if it is below a 
certain distance to the ground.  
 
Fig. 14. 3D visualization of the UAV-AM position during the sample 
collection mission. 
 
(a)  
 
(b)  
 
(c)  
 
(d)  
 
(e)  
 
(f)  
Fig. 13. Images during the sample collection mission. (a) Start of the mission. (b) UAV-AM hovering at ‘mid-point’. (c) UAV-AM hovering above target. 
(d) Arm is extended. (e) UAV-AM us lowered and sample is collected. (f) Manipulator returns to ‘stow’ position with sample in vial.  
[p.9]
 
Overall the mission was successful, and an adequate 
sample was retrieved. The results of the 3D position data of 
the robot base during the sample collection mission are 
displayed in Fig. 14. These results remain consistent with the 
planned trajectory where the various phases can be identified.  
 
Fig. 15. Position data of the UAV-AM position during the sample collection 
mission. 
Fig. 15 shows the 2D position data of robot base during 
the sample collection mission. From the previous hover test, 
it was found that the UAV was able to hold its z-position very 
well with errors of less than 0.015m. This was seen again in 
this sample retrieval test where the z-position plot shows 
error of less than 0.02m even with waypoint flying. However, 
this was not seen in with the y-position. Compared to the 
hover test oscillations, the oscillations in the lateral axis 
during the sample retrieval are larger with errors averaging 
0.05m. This could be attributed to manipulator movements 
while the UAV-AM was flying. Furthermore, the greatest 
positional errors occurred in the x-axis (forward direction) 
where the average positional error was recorded to be 0.2m. 
This can be seen in Fig. 15 during phases 2 and 3 which is 
when the UAV-AM flies to a waypoint. It can be seen that 
the UAV-AM always overshoots the position before 
correcting itself. However, this was the reason for 
implementing an intermediate waypoint.  
C. Object Retrieval Test 
The object retrieval flight test involves flying to a 
position, collecting an object and delivering that object to a 
certain point. The purpose of this flight test is to simulate a 
real-word scenario that a GPS-denied aerial manipulator 
might have to perform. This mission consists of five phases: 
Phase 1 
 
Mission start: The UAV-AM takes off to 1.1m 
above the origin (x=0m, y=0m, z=1.1m) (Fig. 
16a).  
Phase 2 
Midpoint: Instead of flying directly to the 
target location, an intermediate guidance 
waypoint is used. This intermediate waypoint is 
set at 1m from the target to prevent the UAM-
AM from overshooting the target waypoint and 
hitting the marker (Fig. 16b). 
Phase 3 
Object manipulation: The UAV-AM flies to 
the waypoint (x=2m, y=0m, z=1.1m). The 
manipulator is deployed into a reach position 
and grasps the object with the gripper. Given 
 
(a)  
 
(b)  
 
(c)  
 
(d) 
 
 
(e)  
 
(f)  
Fig. 16. Images during the object collection mission. (a) Start of the mission. (b) UAV-AM hovering at ‘mid-point’.  (c) Object Manipulation (d) UAV-AM 
increases altitude and object is ‘picked up’. (e) UAV-AM flies to waypoint 2 to deliver the object (f) UAV-AM returns to origin. 
[p.10]
 
the manipulator specifications and the location 
of the object relative to the robot base are 
known, 
inverse 
kinematics 
is 
used 
to 
manipulate the object (Fig. 16c,d). 
Phase 4 
Object delivery: The UAV-AM increases its 
altitude to 1.4m to ‘pick up’ the object out of 
the enclosure and flies to 1m laterally to the 
waypoint (x=2m, y=1m, z=1.4m). The gripper 
is opened, and the object is delivered. (Fig. 
16e). 
Phase 5 
Return: The UAV-AM flies back to its take-
off location and lands (Fig. 16f).  
Overall, the mission was not very successful as the object 
was only able to be retrieved once out of multiple attempts. 
As such, the mission was only able to be completed based on 
trial-and-error such that the UAV-AM had to be at the correct 
location with a millimetre tolerance for the object to be 
successfully retrieved. This was due to the open loop control 
theory which will be discussed in Conclusion and Future 
Work. The results of the 3D position data of robot base during 
the object retrieval mission are displayed in Fig. 17 where the 
various phases of the mission can be identified in the graph.  
 
Fig. 17. 3D visualization of the UAV-AM position during the object 
manipulation mission. 
Fig. 18 shows the 2D position data of robot base during 
the object collection mission. From the previous hover test, it 
was found that the UAV was able to hold its z-position very 
well with errors of less than 0.015m. This was seen again in 
this object retrieval test where the z-position plot shows error 
of less than 0.01m. This was an improvement from the z-
position error in the sample retrieval test which showed 
maximum error deviation of 0.02m. Similarly, during this 
object retrieval test, the positional error in the y-axis was far 
better than the sample collection test. In the object retrieval 
test, the maximum error deviation in the y-axis was less than 
0.01m compared the sample retrieval test which showed 
oscillations in the lateral axis averaging 0.05m. From the 
hover test, it was shown that manipulator movements have a 
significant impact on the control and dynamics of the UAV. 
As such, this object retrieval test required very little 
manipulator movements which led to the flight of the UAV-
AM to be very stable. Again, this was shown in the x-axis 
where there was almost no positional error since manipulator 
movements were limited.  
 
Fig. 18. Position data of the UAV-AM position during the object 
manipulation mission. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents a practical application of an 
autonomous quadcopter based aerial manipulator with a two-
DOF robot arm. The design and flight test of an aerial 
manipulator in this paper provides a strong foundation for 
future developments in aerial manipulation. However, there 
are still aspects that require attention. 
When evaluating the performance of the solution, the 
results from the Object Retrieval Test found that the object 
could not be accurately grasped. This was due to the 
decoupled manipulator controller having no feedback loop as 
shown in Fig. 4. Therefore, future work could involve 
designing a feedback loop for the manipulator controller in 
the form of visual servoing. Visual servoing would involve 
mounting a camera on the end effector and moving the joints 
based on visual feedback. This would lead to a robust way of 
accurately 
manipulating 
an 
object 
in 
GPS-denied 
environments where completely accurate UAV positioning is 
not possible.  
Finally, while the UAV-AM proved to be successful in 
flying with GPS-denied sensors indoors, the ultimate goal 
would be to use this system in any environment especially 
outdoors. As such future work could be done on flight testing 
in outdoor environments to analyse the effects of nature such 
as wind and drift on the aerial manipulator.  
[p.11]
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was supported by The Australian Research 
Council (ARC) through the ARC Discovery Project 2018 
“Navigating under the forest canopy and in the urban jungle'' 
(grant 
number 
ARC 
DP180102250). 
The 
authors 
acknowledge continued support from the Queensland 
University of Technology (QUT) through the Centre for 
Robotics. The authors would also like to gratefully thank the 
QUT Research Engineering Facility (REF) team (Dr Dmitry 
Bratanov, Gavin Broadbent, Dean Gilligan) for their 
technical support that made possible conducting the flight 
tests.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. M. Korpela, T. W. Danko and P. Y. Oh, "Designing a system 
for mobile manipulation from an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle," in 
IEEE Conference on Technologies for Practical Robot 
Applications, TePRA, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2011.  
[2] L. M. Alexander and O. K. Mangum, "Maintenance of 
transmission lines by helicopter," Electrical Engineering, vol. 
72, no. 12, p. 1094, 1953.  
[3] S. Bouabdallah, M. Becker and R. Siegwart, "Autonomous 
miniature flying robots: coming soon! - Research, Development, 
and Results," IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine , vol. 14, 
no. 3, pp. 88-98, 2007.  
[4] S. Kim, S. Choi and H. J. Kim, "Aerial manipulation using a 
quadrotor with a two DOF robotic arm," in IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 
Tokyo, Japan, 2013.  
[5] A. Jimenez-Cano, J. Martin, G. Heredia, A. Ollero and R. Cano, 
"Control of an aerial robot with multi-link arm for assembly 
tasks," in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation, Karlsruhe, Germany, 2013.  
[6] K. Morton and L. F. G. Toro, "Development of a robust 
framework for an outdoor mobile manipulation UAV," in 2016 
IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, MT, USA, 2016.  
[7] X. Ding, P. Guo, K. Xu and Y. Yu, "A review of aerial 
manipulation of small-scale rotorcraft unmanned robotic 
systems," Chinese Journal of Aeronautics, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 
200-214, 2019.  
[8] A. Mishra and S. Behra, "Design of an aerial manipulation 
system with robotic claw for search and rescue operations," in 
2020 IEEE Bombay Section Signature Conference, Mumbai, 
India, 2020.  
[9] M. Plooij and M. Wisse, "A novel spring mechanism to reduce 
energy consumption of robotic arms," in 25th IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Robotics and Intelligent Systems, 
IROS 2012, Vilamoura, Algarve, Portugal, 2012.  
[10] K. Morton, A. McFadyen and a. F. Gonzalez, "Generalized 
Trajectory Control for Tree-Structured Aerial Manipulators," in 
International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems, 
Dallas, 2018.  
[11] K. Morton, F. Gonzalez and A. McFadyen, "Search and Retrieve 
with a Fully Autonomous Aerial Manipulator," in 40th IEEE 
Aerospace Confreence, Montana, 2019.  
[12] Y. Ma, S. Soatto, J. Košecká and S. S. Sastry, An Invitation to 
3-D Vision, vol. 26, New York, NY: Springer, 2004.  
[13] Holybro, "S500 V2 Kit," Holybro, 2018. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.holybro.com/product/pixhawk4-s500-v2-kit/. 
[Accessed 2021 10 10]. 
 
 
=== END ===
