warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0461.pdf
sha256: E8C5F47FB22CED10FBA0AB2452593402674CCA08A6DE5D446BED765F6133ADA3
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 7
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Autonomous MAV Navigation in Complex
GNSS-denied 3D Environments
Matthias Nieuwenhuisen, David Droeschel, Marius Beul, and Sven Behnke
Abstract— Micro aerial vehicles, such as multirotors, are
particular well suited for the autonomous exploration, exam-
ination, and surveillance of otherwise inaccessible areas, e.g.,
for search and rescue missions in indoor disaster sites. Key
prerequisites for the fully autonomous operation of micro aerial
vehicles in restricted environments are 3D mapping, real-time
pose tracking, obstacle detection, and planning of collision-free
trajectories.
In this work, we propose a complete navigation system with
a multimodal sensor setup for omnidirectional environment
perception. Measurements of a 3D laser scanner are aggregated
in egocentric local multiresolution grid maps. Local maps are
registered and merged to allocentric maps in which the MAV
localizes. For autonomous navigation, we generate trajectories
in a multi-layered approach: from mission planning over global
and local trajectory planning to reactive obstacle avoidance. We
evaluate our approach in a GNSS-denied indoor environment
where multiple collision hazards require reliable omnidirec-
tional perception and quick navigation reactions.
I. INTRODUCTION
Micro aerial vehicles (MAVs) are becoming a key factor
in reducing the required time, risks, and costs for search
and rescue missions, inspection tasks and aerial photography.
Due to their ﬂexibility and low cost, they constitute a superior
alternative to employing heavy machinery or even risking the
health of humans in many situations. Still, in most cases, a
human operator pilots the MAV remotely to fulﬁll a speciﬁc
task or the MAV is following a predeﬁned path of GNSS
waypoints in an obstacle-free altitude.
MAVs allow to quickly visit otherwise inaccessible vol-
umes, but permanent line-of-sight to the MAV may not be
maintainable. Also, passages may be narrow and surrounding
environmental structures may be hard to perceive for a
human operator. Hence, remotely controlling an MAV in
complex 3D environments is much more demanding than
controlling a ground vehicle. For example, Kruijff et al.
report an overload of MAV operators while inspecting an
earthquake site [1]. Narrow passages and fully closed rooms
also prevent the use of global navigation satellite systems
(GNSS) like GPS or GLONASS such that GNSS-based
hovering or waypoint following is not an option.
In order to safely navigate in such environments, an
alternative is to make MAVs autonomous, such that they
can on their own—without interaction with the operator—
solve well-deﬁned sub-tasks. For example, the operator may
This work has been supported by the German Federal Ministry for
Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWi) in the Autonomics for Industry 4.0
project InventAIRy.
The authors are with the Autonomous Intelligent Systems Group, Institute
for Computer Science VI, University of Bonn, Germany nieuwenh at
ais.uni-bonn.de
Fig. 1: Equipped with a plurality of sensors, our MAV is
capable to localize and navigate in complex indoor environ-
ments, e.g., a hall with structures hanging from the ceiling.
specify a set of regions within a building and the MAV
autonomously approaches all regions and collects sensor
information.
For the autonomous operation of MAVs, key prerequisites
are localization in unmodiﬁed GNSS-denied environments,
real-time obstacle detection, and planning of collision-free
trajectories. Fundamental aspects in the implementation of
such a system are robustness—all obstacles need to be reli-
ably detected and mapped while avoiding false positives—
and real-time onboard processing.
In this article, we present a complete integrated system
consisting of a MAV with a multimodal omnidirectional
sensor setup (see Fig. 1), a laser-based 3D mapping and 6D
localization, and a multilayered navigation approach, tailored
to the special needs of MAVs. Each layer uses and builds its
own environment representation: allocentric maps for global
path and mission planning and egocentric obstacle maps for
local trajectory planning and reactive collision avoidance. We
employ Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM)
to build initial allocentric maps of the environment used for
navigation and localization.
Especially in massively changed environments like dam-
aged buildings, furniture and building debris change position
and cables are hanging from the ceiling. Hence, previously
built maps for planning and localization might be outdated.
Thus, environment models and navigation plans have to
be updated online, whenever more information becomes
available during ﬂight.
All onboard sensors have only local precision. This is
reﬂected in the local multiresolution property of our MAV-
centric obstacle map. We employ 3D local multiresolution
path planning. These techniques allow for efﬁcient map
updates and frequent replanning, which makes 3D navigation
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 13:01:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
in dynamic, unpredictable environments possible.
This article extends our previous work on autonomous
outdoor navigation [2]. Our main contributions here are I)
robust 6D indoor localization by means of fast multilevel
surfel registration and II) global navigation with a cost
function—tailored to the requirements of our localization.
We integrated our new components together with our fast
egocentric obstacle perception and avoidance into an MAV
system capable of executing fully autonomous missions in
complex indoor environments. The robustness is evaluated
in multiple autonomous indoor ﬂight experiments.
II. RELATED WORK
The use of MAVs in search-and-rescue applications is an
active research topic with increasing popularity. Multiple
groups use MAVs to obtain a quick overview of an area
and to guide unmanned ground vehicles (UGV). Michael
et al. carry an AscTec Pelican MAV on an UGV to map
and inspect hardly accessible areas in a building after an
earthquake [3]. Similar to our work, their MAV can operate
in autonomous and semi-autonomous mode, depending on
the mission requirements. However, in contrast to our work
they focus on a computationally constrained MAV and omit
full 3D navigation restricting it to 2.5D environments, a
restriction we do not make. Luo et al. show that the guidance
of UGVs by MAVs can reduce the time needed to fulﬁll
missions [4].
Particularly important for fully autonomous operation is
the ability to perceive obstacles and to avoid collisions.
Obstacle avoidance is often neglected, e.g., by ﬂying in a
sufﬁcient height when autonomously ﬂying between way-
points.
For mobile ground robots, 3D laser scanning sensors are
widely used due to their accurate distance measurements
even in bad lighting conditions and their large FoV. Up to
now, such 3D laser scanners are rarely used on lightweight
MAVs—due to payload limitations.
We use a lightweight continuously spinning LRF that does
not only allow for capturing 3D measurements without mov-
ing, but also provides omnidirectional sensing at comparably
high frame rates. An MAV with a similar sensor is used
by Cover et al. [5] to autonomously explore rivers using
visual localization and laser-based 3D obstacle perception.
In contrast to their work, we use the 3D laser scanner for
both omnidirectional obstacle perception and mapping the
environment in 3D.
Similar to our work, Israelsen et al. [6] present an approach
to local collision avoidance that works without global local-
ization and can aid a human operator to navigate safely in
the vicinity of obstacles. Our work extends the safety layer
by a deliberative planning layer based on local maps and
navigation targets.
Heng et al. [7] use a multiresolution grid map to represent
the surroundings of a quadrotor. A feasible plan is generated
with a vector ﬁeld histogram. Schmid et al. [8] autonomously
navigate to user-speciﬁed waypoints in a mine. The map
used for planning is created by an onboard stereo camera
system. By using rapidly exploring random belief trees
(RRBT), Achtelik et al. [9] plan paths that do not only
avoid obstacles, but also minimize the variability of the state
estimation. Recent search-based methods for obstacle-free
navigation include work of MacAllister et al. [10]. They use
A* search to ﬁnd a feasible path in a four-dimensional grid
map incorporating the asymmetric shape of the MAV. Cover
et al. [5] also use a search-based method. These methods
assume complete knowledge of the scene geometry—an
assumption that we do not make here.
Shen et al. estimate the MAV state in combined indoor and
outdoor ﬂights by fusing different sensor modalities [11]. A
2D laser scanner is used for indoor localization. In contrast,
our laser-based localization can estimate the complete 6D
pose relative to a map coordinate frame.
III. SYSTEM SETUP AND OVERVIEW
A. Platform and Sensor Setup
Our MAV is an octorotor with a co-axial arrangement of
rotors (see Fig. 1). This yields a compact ﬂying platform
that is able to carry a plurality of sensors and a fast computer
(Intel Core i7-3820QM 2.7 GHz). For sensor data processing
and navigation planning, we employ the Robot Operating
System (ROS) as middleware. For low-level velocity and
attitude control, the MAV is equipped with a PIXHAWK
Autopilot ﬂight control unit. To allow for safe omnidirec-
tional operation in challenging environments, our MAV is
equipped with a multimodal sensor setup:
• Main sensor for obstacle perception is a continuously
rotating 3D laser scanner. Only a small conical volume
on the upper rear is occluded by the MAV core.
• Two monochrome stereo camera pairs (pointing in
forward and backward direction) are used for visual
odometry and obstacle perception. Equipped with ﬁsh-
eye lenses, they cover a large area around the MAV.
• Eight ultrasonic sensors measure distances in all direc-
tions around the MAV. Despite their limited accuracy
and range of 6 m, they detect transparent obstacles, like
windows.
IV. LOCAL PERCEPTION
We construct a MAV-centric multiresolution grid map that
is used to accumulate sensor measurements.
We ﬁrst register newly acquired 3D scans with the so
far accumulated map and then update the map with the
registered 3D scan. The map is utilized by our path planning
and obstacle avoidance algorithms described in subsequent
sections.
A. 3D Scan Assembly
When assembling 3D scans from raw laser scans, we
account for the rotation of the scanner w.r.t. the MAV and
for the motion of the MAV during acquisition. Thus, scan
assembling mainly consists of two steps.
First, measurements of individual scan lines are undis-
torted with regards to the rotation of the 2D LRF around the
servo rotation axis. Here, the rotation between the acquisition
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 13:01:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
Fig. 2: Left: Grid-based local multiresolution map with a
higher resolution in proximity to the sensor and a lower
resolution with increasing distance. Color encodes height.
Right: The surfel representation of the map (colored by surfel
orientation).
of two scan lines is distributed over the measurements by
using spherical linear interpolation.
Second, we compensate for the motion of the MAV during
acquisition of a full 3D scan. To this end, we incorporate a
visual odometry estimate from the two stereo cameras. Here,
a keyframe-based bundle adjustment is performed [12] on
the synchronized images with 18 Hz update rate. Since the
update rate of the 2D LRF is 40 Hz, we linearly interpolate
between the estimates of the visual odometry. The 6D motion
estimate is used to assemble the individual 2D scan lines of
each half rotation to a 3D scan.
B. Local Multiresolution Map
We use a hybrid local multiresolution map that represents
both occupancy information and the individual distance mea-
surements. The most recent measurements are stored in ring
buffers within grid cells that increase in size with distance
from the robot center. Thus, we use a high resolution in
the close proximity to the sensor and a lower resolution far
away from our robot, which correlates with the sensor char-
acteristics in measurement accuracy and density. Compared
to uniform grid-based maps, multiresolution leads to the use
of fewer grid cells, without losing relevant information and
consequently results in lower computational costs. Fig. 2
shows an example of our local multiresolution grid-based
map.
We aim for efﬁcient map management for translation and
rotation. To this end, individual grid cells are stored in a
ring buffer to allow shifting of elements in constant time.
We interlace multiple ring buffers to obtain a map with three
dimensions. The length of the ring buffers depends on the
resolution and the size of the map. In case of a translation
of the MAV, the ring buffers are shifted whenever necessary
to maintain the egocentric property of the map. For sub-cell-
length translations, the translational parts are accumulated
and shifted if they exceed the length of a cell.
C. Registration Approach
We register each newly acquired 3D scan with the local
multiresolution map of the environment with our surfel-based
method [13]. Instead of considering each point individually,
we represent the 3D scan as local multiresolution grid and
match surfels. In each cell of the grid, we maintain one
surfel that summarizes the individual 3D points that lie
within the cell (cf. Fig. 2). A surfel is deﬁned by the sample
mean and the sample covariance of these points. We align
a newly acquired scan (scene) and the local multiresolution
map (model) by ﬁnding a rigid 6 degree-of-freedom (DoF)
transformation T(θ) that best aligns the scene surfels to
the model surfels. By summarizing measurements in surfels,
and therefore considering several orders of magnitudes less
elements for registration, we gain efﬁciency. When matching
surfels we choose the ﬁnest common resolution available
between both maps to achieve accuracy. We cope with the
sparsity of the 3D scans obtained from our LRF through
probabilistic assignments of surfels during the registration
process.
V. ALLOCENTRIC MAPPING AND LOCALIZATION
For fast estimation of the MAV motion, we incorporate
IMU and visual odometry measurements into velocity and
pose estimates. While these estimates allow us to control the
MAV and to track its pose over a short period of time, they
are prone to drift and thus are not suitable for localization on
the time scale of a mission. Furthermore, they do not provide
a ﬁxed allocentric frame for the deﬁnition of mission-
relevant poses independent from the MAV. Thus, we build
an allocentric map by means of laser-based SLAM before
mission execution and employ laser-based pose tracking w.r.t.
this map during autonomous operation.
A. Mapping
This allocentric map is build by aligning multiple lo-
cal multiresolution maps, acquired from different view
poses [14]. We model the different view poses as nodes in
a graph that are connected by edges. A node consists of the
local multiresolution map from the corresponding view pose.
Each edge in the graph models a spatial constraint between
two nodes.
After adding a new 3D scan to the local multiresolution
map as described in Sec. IV-C, the local map is registered
towards the previous node in the graph using the multireso-
lution surfel registration with probabilistic assignments [13].
The resulting pose graph is efﬁciently optimized by using
the g2o framework by Kuemmerle et al. [15]. After the MAV
has traversed the environment, the allocentric map is build
from the optimized pose graph by merging all local surfel
maps. Here, we use surfels with uniform resolution. Fig. 3
shows an example map acquired from a combined indoor
and outdoor ﬂight.
B. Pose Tracking
When executing a mission, the MAV traverses a set of goal
poses w.r.t. the coordinate frame deﬁned by our allocentric
map. Since the laser scanner acquires complete 3D scans
with a relatively low frame rate, we incorporate the egomo-
tion estimate from the visual odometry and measurements
from the IMU to track the pose of the MAV. The egomotion
estimate is used as a prior for the motion between two
consecutive 3D scans. In detail, we track the pose hypothesis
by alternating the prediction of the MAV movement given the
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 13:01:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
Fig. 3: Allocentric map from a combined indoor/outdoor
ﬂight after pose graph optimization. Left: Perspective view.
Right: Top-view with removed ceiling.
Fig. 4: Undistorted local 3D laser scans (red) are matched
to the allocentric SLAM map (green) to localize the robot
in the allocentric frame. Here, a downsampled version of the
allocentric map is shown. Left: The estimated robot pose is
depicted by the axes. Right: Blue arrows depict the estimated
MAV trajectory.
ﬁlter result and alignment of the current local multiresolution
map towards the allocentric map of the environment. To align
the current local map with the allocentric map, we also use
the surfel-based registration [13]. The allocentric localization
is triggered after acquiring a 3D scan and adding it to the
local multiresolution map. We update the allocentric robot
pose with the resulting registration transform. To achieve
real-time performance of the localization module, we track
only one pose hypothesis. We assume that the initial pose
of the MAV is known, either by starting from a predeﬁned
pose or by means of manually setting the pose. Fig. 4 shows
the registration of a 3D scan to the map and an estimated
6D trajectory.
The resulting robot pose estimate from the allocentric
localization is used as a measurement update in a lower-level
state estimation ﬁlter. We propagate this allocentric pose over
time with visual odometry and IMU to obtain allocentrically
consistent pose and velocity estimates at a sufﬁciently high
rate for planning and control.
VI. NAVIGATION PLANNING
To operate MAVs in indoor environments for search and
inspection missions, safe navigation in the vicinity of obsta-
cles is key. Compared to outdoor missions, the free space is
restricted and keeping a large safety margin to obstacles is
not an option. Hence, only quick reactions given the observed
vehicle and environment state ensure the successful and safe
mission completion. To allow for both deliberative planning
and quick reactions, we employ hierarchical navigation: from
mission planning to low-level motion control. These tasks
require different abstractions of the environment.
To plan an observation mission, we need a coarse model
of the environment; to plan collision-free paths, we need a
ﬁner and up-to-date consistent geometric model; and to avoid
collisions, we need a non-aggregated local representation
of the close vicinity of the MAV. The planned actions
also have different granularity, which is represented by the
planning frequency, from once per mission to multiple times
per second. The higher-layer planners set goals for the
lower-level planners which produce more concrete action
sequences based on more local and up-to date environment
representations.
A. Mission Planning
The topmost layers are a mission planner and a global path
planner. Both use a similar representation of the environment
that is built by means of SLAM by the MAV beforehand, as
described in the previous section.
Input to the mission planner is a set of view poses deﬁned
by the user. The mission planner employs a global path
planner on a coarse uniform grid map to determine the
approximate costs between every pair of mission goals.
The result of mission planning is a ﬂight plan composed
of an ordered list of 4D waypoints.
B. Global Path Planning
The next layer in the planning hierarchy is a global path
planner. This layer plans globally consistent plans, based
on I) the (updated) environment model, discretized to grid
cells with 0.5 m edge length, II) the current pose estimate of
the MAV, and III) the next mission waypoint, including 3D
position, yaw orientation, and required accuracies. Planning
frequency is 0.2 Hz and we use the A* algorithm to ﬁnd
cost-optimal paths.
In our application domain, most obstacles not represented
in the allocentric map can be surrounded locally, without the
need for global replanning. Hence, it is sufﬁcient to replan
globally on a more long-term time scale to keep the local
deviations of the planner synchronized to the global plan and
to avoid the MAV to get stuck in a local minimum that the
local planner cannot solve due to its restricted view of the
environment.
For application-speciﬁc SLAM maps, it is often not nec-
essary to cover the whole reachable environment, but only
the parts that are relevant for the mission execution. In
particular, they cannot cover the complete space outside
the buildings. Our laser-based localization needs to perceive
sufﬁcient structure to work robustly. Hence, the MAV should
not ﬂy in completely unmapped or free space, e.g., at a height
where the ground is no longer observed by the LRF. To
ensure robust localization even in partial maps and unbound
environments, we employ an approach inspired by coastal
navigation [16]. With increasing distance to obstacles, our
obstacle cost function hc(d) decreases until distance Do.
Starting at a distance Dp1, the perception cost function hp
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 13:01:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
Fig. 5: Cut through cost map some meters above ground. For
robust LRF-based localization, laser scans have to contain
sufﬁcient structure. We modify the traversal costs to not
only avoid obstacles, but also keep them within sensor range.
Left: Obstacle avoidance only. Right: Obstacle avoidance and
robust localization.
increases up to a maximum at Dp2 to keep the obstacles in
the observable range of the MAV. Our cost model h(d) is:
hc(d)
=
⎧
⎨
⎩
∞
if d ≤Ds,
hmax
1−d+Ds
Do−Ds
if Ds < d < Do,
0
otherwise;
hp(d)
=
⎧
⎨
⎩
0
if d ≥Dp1,
hmax
d−Dp1
Dp2−Dp1
if Dp1 < d < Dp2,
hmax
otherwise;
h(d)
=
w1 · hc(d) + w2 · hp(d),
with equal weights w1 = w2. Ds is the safety distance
around obstacles the robot should never enter (at least the
robot radius). Fig. 5 illustrates the resulting traversal costs
with and without our approach.
C. Local Multiresolution Path Planning
On the local path planning layer, we employ a 3D local
multiresolution path planner [17]. This layer plans based on
the allocentric path from the global path planner and the 3D
local multiresolution map. It reﬁnes the global path according
to the actual situation and a ﬁner trajectory is fed to the
potential ﬁeld-based reactive obstacle avoidance layer on the
next level.
We embed an undirected graph into the multiresolution
grid and perform A* search from the origin of the MAV-
centered grid to the goal. The traversal costs hc of a cell
with distance d to the robot are modeled as
hc(d) = hmax
1 −d −rC
2 ∗rC
for d ∈[rC, 3 ∗rC], where rC is the perceived obstacle with
a distance-dependent radius that models the uncertainty of
farther away perceptions. Closer and farther away obstacles
are modeled with cost hmax and 0, respectively.
The allocentric path is cost-optimal with respect to the
allocentric map. Hence, the path costs of the allocentric path
are a lower bound to path costs for reﬁned plans, based
on newly acquired sensor information—mostly dynamic and
static previously unknown obstacles—and a local path de-
viating from the global plan cannot be shorter in terms of
path costs. Locally shorter plans on lower layers with a local
view on the map may yield globally suboptimal paths. We
address this by coupling the local planner to the solution of
the allocentric path planner by a cost term ha, which is the
shortest distance between a grid cell and any segment of the
allocentric plan. The total cost h for traversing a grid cell is
h = w1 · hc(d) + w2 · ha.
Local multiresolution path planning leverages efﬁciency.
Since parts of the plan that are farther away from the MAV
are more likely to change, e.g., due to newly acquired sensor
data, it is reasonable to spend more effort into a ﬁner plan in
the close vicinity of the robot. Overall, our approach reduces
the planning time and makes frequent replanning feasible.
D. Local Obstacle Avoidance
On the next lower layer, we employ a fast reactive collision
avoidance module based on artiﬁcial potential ﬁelds as a
safety measure reacting directly on the available sensor
inputs. The robot-centered local multiresolution occupancy
grid, the current motion state, and a target velocity, serve as
input to our algorithm. The obstacle map induces repulsive
forces on the MAV pushing it away from obstacles. Analysis
of the MAV motion model gives us a maximum stopping
distance of 0.8 m in 0.5 s under ideal conditions. Hence,
we can safely operate in the vicinity of obstacles. For more
details on the potential ﬁeld obstacle avoidance layer, please
refer to our prior work [17].
VII. EVALUATION
We evaluated the integration of our components into one
working MAV mapping and surveillance system. Here, we
describe one exemplary indoor surveillance session of our
MAV. The main goal of this experiment was to autonomously
navigate to certain predeﬁned waypoints in a hall, employing
solely means of localization that are available in both indoor
and outdoor environments. During ﬂight, the MAVs mission
was to detect visual features (AprilTags [18]), representing
interesting locations near the trajectory. Local navigation
and control were performed using visual odometry and
allocentric localization was performed employing our laser-
based approach.
First, we navigated the MAV manually through a hall, a
garage, and an outdoor part connecting these two buildings.
Subsequently, we built a map from the data collected during
this ﬂight (Fig. 3). The map is used for localization and
we derived an OctoMap for mission and path planning.
In applications where such an initial ﬂight is not feasible,
building construction plans could be used instead.
Second, we deﬁned a mission with six observation poses—
plus a return pose 2 m above the start pose—in the smaller
building part, a decommissioned car service station with
multiple collision hazards. Our mission planner plans paths
between every pair of mission poses and determines the best
visiting order. After takeoff, the global planner begins to
continuously plan paths to the next mission-relevant pose.
The local obstacle avoidance keeps the MAV successfully
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 13:01:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
Fig. 6: We conducted indoor ﬂight experiments in a 20 × 16 × 6 m hall. The trajectories show the laser-based localization
estimates of 10 consecutive autonomous ﬂights. From left to right: map top-view, closeup of the trajectories, perspective
view. Observation poses are depicted by black arrows, the blue arrow shows the return pose. The map color encodes height.
Fig. 7: The MAV is repelled from a small pipe structure (red
circled) hanging from the ceiling close to the MAV’s view
pose. The right ﬁgure shows how the obstacle is perceived
by the MAV. Red lines depict the artiﬁcial repelling forces
of the reactive collision avoidance.
away from obstacles like hanging cables and debris, ly-
ing around in the hall. In these experiments, we planned
allocentric paths in a grid with a cell size of 0.5 m. An
excerpt from the map, the inspection poses, and the traversed
trajectories of ten missions are shown in Fig. 6. The MAV
successfully reached all poses in the experiments without
colliding with an obstacle and was localized all the time. In
experiments without running localization module, the MAV
still was able to avoid dynamic and static obstacles with
the local collision avoidance layer. This layer solely relies
on egocentric velocity estimates, e.g., from an integration of
visual odometry, accelerometers, and gyroscopes.
Fig. 7 shows a situation from one of the runs where the
MAV is ﬂying towards a mission view pose. Close to the
view pose, a long thin structure is hanging from the ceiling.
The structure is perceived with the onboard sensors and
avoided by means of artiﬁcial repelling forces. In our test
setup, many smaller and larger structures obstruct the free
space. In all cases, the MAV deviated from the direct path or
moved away from a hover position to avoid a collision. Fig. 8
shows the magnitudes of repelling forces while fulﬁlling
a planned mission. The shown positions are from the ten
autonomous ﬂights shown in Fig. 6 plus one additional
mission with observation poses closer to some obstacles.
Samples for illustration are taken every 500 ms. A video of
our mission execution experiments is available as attachment
to this work1. Further collision avoidance experiments are
1www.ais.uni-bonn.de/InventAIRy/videos/ssrr-indoor.mp4
presented in a video on our website2.
During the execution of the surveillance mission, the MAV
detects visual features. As seen in Fig. 8, we use AprilTags
with 26 cm side length as a surrogate for interesting locations
near the trajectory. Here, they represent, e.g., victims in
an earthquake-scenario, pipes leaking poisonous liquids, or
burning debris. Surrogating visual features is a common tech-
nique used to evaluate mapping systems, e.g., in RoboCup
Rescue3.
Fig. 9 shows a map of the detected AprilTags during ten
ﬂights. It can be seen that the clustering of all detections is
within 0.5 m and that most tags are detected many times. So,
even if, e.g., smoke would prevent the perception from one
side, the tag could nevertheless be perceived. The detection
and mapping of AprilTags is detailed in [19].
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we presented an integrated system to au-
tonomously operate MAVs safely in the vicinity of obstacles.
We approached this challenge by employing local mul-
tiresolution mapping and planning techniques that facilitate
frequent updates and replanning.
We showed that by incorporating multimodal sensor informa-
tion, we are able to detect and avoid diverse obstacles. Pose
estimation based on camera and laser data enables robust
motion control in GNSS-denied environments.
Laser-range measurements are aggregated by registering
sparse 3D scans with a local multiresolution surfel map.
Modeling measurement distributions within voxels by sur-
face elements allows for efﬁcient and accurate registration of
3D scans with the local map. The incrementally built local
dense 3D maps of nearby key poses are registered globally by
graph optimization. This yields a globally consistent dense
3D map of the environment. We demonstrate accuracy and
efﬁciency of our approach by showing consistent allocentric
3D maps, recorded by our MAV during ﬂight.
We demonstrated that multilayered navigation planning re-
sults in a high capability to cope with dynamically changing
environments and perpetually new obstacle perceptions. A
2www.ais.uni-bonn.de/MoD
3www.robocuprescue.org
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 13:01:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.7]
Fig. 8: Artiﬁcial forces from the reactive collision avoidance. Shown is the strength of repelling forces pushing the MAV away
from obstacles at samples along the trajectories of ten autonomous ﬂights. Green: small magnitude / Red: large magnitude.
The photos show some obstacles and their approximate position in the maps.
Fig. 9: Map of detected AprilTags of ten consecutive ﬂights.
Seven different tags are perceived and marked in magenta,
cyan, blue, green, gray, violet and red. A sample trajectory
is shown in red. The grid size is 1 × 1 m.
reactive collision avoidance layer accounts for fast MAV and
environment dynamics and reﬁnes higher-level mission plans
based on onboard sensing and a priori information.
We showed the system robustness in multiple indoor
experiments where the only manual interactions were the
starting and landing phases. Thus, the system is able inspect
areas for the detection of threats or search for victims in
a fully autonomous mission. This reduces the workload of
human operators in disaster situations.
REFERENCES
[1] G.-J. M. Kruijff, I. Kruijff-Korbayová, S. Keshavdas, B. Larochelle,
M. Janíˇcek, F. Colas, M. Liu, F. Pomerleau, R. Siegwart, M. A. Neer-
incx, R. Looije, N. J. J. M. Smets, T. Mioch, J. van Diggelen, F. Pirri,
M. Gianni, F. Ferri, M. Menna, R. Worst, T. Linder, V. Tretyakov,
H. Surmann, T. Svoboda, M. Reinštein, K. Zimmermann, T. Petˇríˇcek,
and V. Hlaváˇc, “Designing, developing, and deploying systems to
support human–robot teams in disaster response,” Advanced Robotics,
special issue on Disaster Response Robotics, vol. 28, no. 23, pp. 1547–
1570, December 2014.
[2] D. Droeschel, M. Nieuwenhuisen, M. Beul, D. Holz, J. Stückler, and
S. Behnke, “Multi-layered mapping and navigation for autonomous
micro aerial vehicles,” J. of Field Robotics, 2015, published online.
[3] N. Michael, S. Shen, K. Mohta, V. Kumar, K. Nagatani, Y. Okada,
S. Kiribayashi, K. Otake, K. Yoshida, K. Ohno, E. Takeuchi, and
S. Tadokoro, “Collaborative mapping of an earthquake-damaged build-
ing via ground and aerial robots,” in Int. Conf. on Field and Service
Robotics (FSR), 2012.
[4] C. Luo, A. P. Espinosa, D. Pranantha, and A. D. Gloria, “Multi-robot
search and rescue team,” in Proc. of the IEEE Int. Symposium on
Safety, Security and Rescue Robotics (SSRR), 2011.
[5] H. Cover, S. Choudhury, S. Scherer, and S. Singh, “Sparse tangential
network (SPARTAN): Motion planning for micro aerial vehicles,” in
Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2013.
[6] J. Israelsen, M. Beall, D. Bareiss, D. Stuart, E. Keeney, and J. van den
Berg, “Automatic collision avoidance for manually tele-operated un-
manned aerial vehicles,” in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2014.
[7] L. Heng, D. Honegger, G. H. Lee, L. Meier, P. Tanskanen, F. Fraundor-
fer, and M. Pollefeys, “Autonomous visual mapping and exploration
with a micro aerial vehicle,” J. of Field Robotics, vol. 31, no. 4, pp.
654–675, 2014.
[8] K. Schmid, P. Lutz, T. Tomic, E. Mair, and H. Hirschmüller, “Au-
tonomous vision-based micro air vehicle for indoor and outdoor
navigation,” J. of Field Robotics, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 537–570, 2014.
[9] M. W. Achtelik, S. Lynen, S. Weiss, M. Chli, and R. Siegwart,
“Motion- and uncertainty-aware path planning for micro aerial ve-
hicles,” J. of Field Robotics, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 676–698, 2014.
[10] B. MacAllister, J. Butzke, A. Kushleyev, H. Pandey, and M. Likhachev,
“Path planning for non-circular micro aerial vehicles in constrained
environments,” in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2013.
[11] S. Shen, Y. Mulgaonkar, N. Michael, and V. Kumar, “Multi-sensor
fusion for robust autonomous ﬂight in indoor and outdoor environ-
ments with a rotorcraft mav,” in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2014.
[12] J. Schneider, T. Läbe, and W. Förstner, “Incremental real-time bundle
adjustment for multi-camera systems with points at inﬁnity,” in Int.
Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci. (ISPRS), vol. XL-
1/W2, 2013.
[13] D. Droeschel, J. Stückler, and S. Behnke, “Local multi-resolution rep-
resentation for 6D motion estimation and mapping with a continuously
rotating 3D laser scanner,” in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2014.
[14] ——, “Local multi-resolution surfel grids for mav motion estimation
and 3D mapping,” in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Intelligent Autonomous
Systems (IAS), 2014.
[15] R. Kuemmerle, G. Grisetti, H. Strasdat, K. Konolige, and W. Burgard,
“g2o: A general framework for graph optimization,” in Proc. of the
Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2011.
[16] N. Roy, W. Burgard, D. Fox, and S. Thrun, “Coastal navigation-
mobile robot navigation with uncertainty in dynamic environments,”
in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 1999.
[17] M. Nieuwenhuisen and S. Behnke, “Layered mission and path plan-
ning for MAV navigation with partial environment knowledge,” in
Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Intelligent Autonomous Systems (IAS), 2014.
[18] E. Olson, “AprilTag: A robust and ﬂexible visual ﬁducial system,” in
Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2011.
[19] M. Beul, N. Krombach, Y. Zhong, D. Droeschel, M. Nieuwenhuisen,
and S. Behnke, “A high-performance MAV for autonomous navigation
in complex 3D environments,” in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Unmanned
Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), 2015.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 13:01:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
