warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1096.pdf
sha256: B065C1891F6BE773409AC5382BBA710F0D96BDBBD4EF94FCF30CEEA942124F79
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 30
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Academic Editor: Maolong Lv
Received: 19 November 2025
Revised: 25 December 2025
Accepted: 6 January 2026
Published: 9 January 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Article
DTVIRM-Swarm: A Distributed and Tightly Integrated
Visual-Inertial-UWB-Magnetic System for Anchor Free Swarm
Cooperative Localization
Xincan Luo 1,2
, Xueyu Du 1,2, Shuai Yue 1,2, Yunxiao Lv 1,2, Lilian Zhang 1,2
, Xiaofeng He 1,2
, Wenqi Wu 1,2
and Jun Mao 1,2,*
1
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha 410073, China; luoxincan18@nudt.edu.cn (X.L.); duxueyu18@nudt.edu.cn (X.D.);
yueshuai23@nudt.edu.cn (S.Y.); lvyunxiao@nudt.edu.cn (Y.L.); lilianzhang@nudt.edu.cn (L.Z.);
hexiaofeng@nudt.edu.cn (X.H.); wuwenqi@nudt.edu.cn (W.W.)
2
National Key Laboratory of Equipment State Sensing and Smart Support, Changsha 410073, China
*
Correspondence: maojun12@nudt.edu.cn
Highlights
This study proposes DTVIRM-Swarm, a distributed, anchor-free cooperative localization
system for UAV swarms that operates without GNSS or pre-deployed anchors. It introduces
a novel MDS-MAP initialization method, achieving faster and more accurate swarm pose
initialization than conventional methods. The system demonstrates superior accuracy and
strong robustness, maintaining operation during vision loss where other methods fail. It
provides a practical, scalable solution for GNSS-denied environments, enabling complex
applications like formation flying under severe conditions.
What are the main findings?
• Superior Localization Accuracy and Efficiency: The proposed system and its novel
MDS-MAP initialization method significantly outperform state-of-the-art alternatives,
achieving faster and more accurate swarm pose initialization than conventional meth-
ods, culminating in real-world accuracy that is higher than leading VIO and collabora-
tive methods.
• Enhanced Robustness in Degraded Conditions: The tightly-coupled framework demon-
strates exceptional resilience, maintaining stable operation and reliable positioning
during complete vision deprivation, a scenario in which comparable state-of-the-art
systems fail entirely.
What are the implications of the main findings?
• A Practical Enabler for GNSS-Denied Operations:
This work provides a viable,
infrastructure-independent solution for multi-robot collaborative localization, effectively
addressing a critical gap for deploying low-cost UAV swarms in complex environments
where traditional GNSS or anchor-dependent systems are infeasible.
• A Pathway to Scalable and Resilient Applications: The system’s design principles,
including its efficient initialization and robust sensor fusion, pave the way for scalable
applications involving large-scale swarms or heterogeneous robot teams, while its
performance under harsh conditions expands the operational envelope for autonomous
systems to more severe scenarios.
Abstract
Accurate Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) positioning is vital for swarm cooperation.
However, this remains challenging in situations where Global Navigation Satellite System
(GNSS) and other external infrastructures are unavailable. To address this challenge, we
Drones 2026, 10, 49
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.2]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
2 of 30
propose to use only the onboard Microelectromechanical System Inertial Measurement
Unit (MIMU), Magnetic sensor, Monocular camera and Ultra-Wideband (UWB) device to
construct a distributed and anchor-free cooperative localization system by tightly fusing
the measurements. As the onboard UWB measurements under dynamic motion condi-
tions are noisy and discontinuous, we propose an adaptive adjustment method based on
chi-squared detection to effectively filter out inconsistent and false ranging information.
Moreover, we introduce the pose-only theory to model the visual measurement, which
improves the efficiency and accuracy for visual-inertial processing. A sliding window
Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is constructed to tightly fuse all the measurements, which
is capable of working under UWB or visual deprived conditions. Additionally, a novel
Multidimensional Scaling-MAP (MDS-MAP) initialization method fuses ranging, MIMU,
and geomagnetic data to solve the non-convex optimization problem in ranging-aided Si-
multaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM), ensuring fast and accurate swarm absolute
pose initialization. To overcome the state consistency challenge inherent in the distributed
cooperative structure, we model not only the UWB noisy uncertainty but also the neighbor
agent’s position uncertainty in the measurement model. Furthermore, we incorporate
the Covariance Intersection (CI) method into our UWB measurement fusion process to
address the challenge of unknown correlations between state estimates from different
UAVs, ensuring consistent and robust state estimation. To validate the effectiveness of the
proposed methods, we have established both simulation and hardware test platforms. The
proposed method is compared with state-of-the-art (SOTA) UAV localization approaches
designed for GNSS-challenged environments. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
algorithm achieves superior positioning accuracy, higher computing efficiency and better
robustness. Moreover, even when vision loss causes other methods to fail, our proposed
method continues to operate effectively.
Keywords: UAV swarm; cooperative localization; sensor fusion; covariance intersection
1. Introduction
Accurate localization is critical for efficient operations and precise control in aerial
robotics, particularly in multi-UAV systems where collaborative tasks, formation flying,
and mission execution depend on it. However, achieving reliable localization remains chal-
lenging in GNSS-denied environments [1]. To overcome this, researchers have investigated
multimodal sensor fusion approaches. Among these, visual-inertial odometry (VIO) has
emerged as a widely studied method that integrates camera and IMU data for relative
motion estimation and localization [2,3].
VIO operates by capturing environmental images through cameras to extract and track
visual features, while IMUs measure acceleration and angular velocity to estimate pose
changes. Despite its advantages, VIO suffers from two primary limitations [4]. First, its
performance heavily depends on visual conditions: feature extraction becomes unreliable
in texture-sparse areas, and sudden environmental changes introduce tracking errors,
degrading localization accuracy. Second, the computational complexity of real-time image
processing and sensor fusion strains the limited processing capabilities of UAVs, further
restricting accuracy and practicality [5,6].
To address these challenges in complex environments, multi-UAV collaborative lo-
calization methods have been developed. These approaches are broadly classified into
centralized and distributed systems based on data processing strategies. Centralized
methods rely on transmitting all UAV-collected data to a ground station or central node
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.3]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
3 of 30
for unified computation. However, they require stable network connectivity and high-
performance hardware at the central node, resulting in scalability and flexibility limitations.
In contrast, distributed systems eliminate central nodes by enabling direct communication
between neighboring UAVs, offering enhanced robustness and adaptability for dynamic
environments. This advantage has made distributed methods increasingly prevalent in
multi-UAV applications [7,8].
Current VIO-based collaborative localization methods often improve accuracy by
sharing environmental characteristics observed across UAV clusters. While effective, such
strategies impose high communication bandwidth requirements, which become problem-
atic as UAV numbers or environmental complexity increases. Alternative approaches
using pre-deployed UWB anchors enhance localization through anchor-based distance
measurements. Nevertheless, these methods lack flexibility due to their dependence on
carefully calibrated anchor infrastructure, making them impractical for unknown or dy-
namic environments where anchor deployment is costly or infeasible [9,10].
To address these challenges and meet the demands for low-cost, lightweight design,
and real-time performance, this paper proposes a novel distributed anchor-free visual-
inertial-UWB-magnetic cooperative localization system (DTVIRM-Swarm) for multi-UAVs
based on the sliding window extended Kalman filter framework. Unlike existing dis-
tributed SLAM systems such as COVINS-G [11] and D2SLAM, which require significant
communication bandwidth for map sharing, our approach leverages direct UWB ranging
between UAVs without relying on pre-deployed anchors, achieving higher communication
efficiency. Compared to COO-VIR [12], which still requires static UWB anchors, our system
offers greater flexibility in unknown environments.
In this system, UAVs measure mutual distances using UWB technology without
relying on UWB anchors. To fully utilize UWB measurements, multiple UWB keyframes
are incorporated into the sliding window, and an adaptive adjustment method for UWB
filtering errors based on chi-squared detection is employed to ensure robustness and
real-time performance. Additionally, to further enhance accuracy, a visual observation
model based on pose-only (PO) theory is adopted, improving the system’s adaptability to
challenging visual environments [13,14].
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
•
Distributed Anchor-Free Architecture with Efficient Initialization: Proposes a dis-
tributed anchor-free cooperative localization framework for multi-UAV swarms, elim-
inating the reliance on central nodes or pre-deployed anchors. Integrates ranging,
geomagnetic, and MIMU data to develop an MDS-MAP initialization method, which
addresses the non-convex optimization problem in ranging-aided SLAM and enables
fast and accurate absolute pose initialization of the swarm, outperforming traditional
GTSAM-based optimization methods by 40.6% in positioning accuracy and reducing
computation time by over 80%.
•
Optimized Sensor Measurement Processing: Targets the noise and discontinuity of
UWB dynamic measurements, presents an adaptive adjustment method based on chi-
squared detection, and fuses multiple UWB keyframes to enhance robustness. Adopts
pose-only (PO) theory for visual measurement modeling, decouples 3D feature recon-
struction, and achieves a balance between positioning accuracy and computational
efficiency, reducing the computational burden compared to traditional VIO systems.
•
Covariance Intersection (CI) for Consistent Measurement Fusion: Incorporates the
CI method into UWB measurement fusion to address the challenge of unknown cor-
relations between state estimates from different UAVs. This ensures consistent and
robust state estimation even in dynamic environments with frequent communica-
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.4]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
4 of 30
tion delays and packet losses, enhancing the overall reliability of the cooperative
localization system.
•
Tightly-Coupled Multi-Sensor Fusion Framework: Constructs a sliding window
EKF to fuse inertial, visual, UWB ranging, and geomagnetic data while explicitly
modeling the position uncertainty of neighboring nodes. The framework maintains
stable operation even in vision-deprived scenarios, breaking through the limitation of
traditional methods that rely on continuous visual input and improving adaptability
to complex environments. Compared to SOTA methods like VINS-Mono, OpenVINS,
and SuperVINS, our system achieves an average positioning error reduction of 38.3%,
40.8%, and 29.7% respectively.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents a literature review. Section 3
introduces the proposed algorithm and the detailed mathematical model of collaborative
localization. Section 4 presents simulation experiments and real experiments, and analyzes
the results. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. Related Work
In the field of UAV collaborative localization, a key issue is the relative position
observation between UAVs. Currently, there are many methods to solve the problem of
relative position observation between drones. Marker-based visual mutual observation
methods usually extract and deploy markers on the drone, and use markers, such as
ultraviolet LED lights and ultraviolet sensitive cameras, combined to perform relative
positioning [15]. Unlabeled visual mutual observation methods often rely on convolutional
neural networks (CNN) [16–18], which use machine learning-based techniques to extract
relative distances, but are easily affected by changes in the appearance of targets and the
environment and cannot provide accurate relative estimates.
Multi-robot SLAM methods can use map merging and loop closure between robots to
obtain relative attitudes. This method requires the communication of a large amount of data
and is not suitable for drone platforms with computational performance constraints [19].
3D LiDAR and UWB can also directly measure relative distances. In [20], the fusion of
3D LiDAR, fisheye camera and UWB data is used to track drones flying above LiDAR
unmanned ground vehicles (UGV). In [21], a distributed LiDAR inertial group range
measurement method was proposed, which uses the reflectivity values from LiDAR data
to directly detect collaborative drones, but using LiDAR as a relative position observation
sensor is costly. In [22], a relative positioning method for micro drones based on VIO and
LiDAR localization was proposed. Slave drones use LiDAR to observe the relative position
and distance of the master drone, and integrate it with VIO to improve the positioning
accuracy of slave drones. However, this method requires a high precision master drone
node. If the master drone node is damaged, the entire drone cluster will not work normally.
To address the issue of substantial positioning errors in GNSS-challenged environ-
ments, particularly when visual features are sparse, researchers have proposed several
methods. In terms of single drone positioning, ref. [23] fuses data from static UWB anchors,
LiDAR odometers, IMUs and VIOs to improve the positioning accuracy of drones in GNSS-
challenged environments, but in emergency situations, it is not feasible to place static UWB
anchors in the area. In [24], a multi-sensor framework is proposed that uses ultra-wideband
(UWB) technology and visual inertial measurement (VIO) to provide robust and low-drift
positioning. In [25], a learning-based drone positioning method is proposed that uses fused
vision, IMU, and UWB sensors, combined with visual inertia (VIO) and UWB branches,
to predict global attitude, but these two methods still require the placement of multiple
ground UWB anchors in advance.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.5]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
5 of 30
In terms of multi-drone positioning, ref. [26] proposed a method that integrates UWB
and VIO for collaborative positioning of two drones, and ref. [27] proposed a method for
distributed formation estimation in large drone clusters. In [8], a distributed collaborative
SLAM system was proposed, which innovatively manages near-field estimation and inte-
grates multiple sensors and map data to achieve accurate near-field relative state estimation
and consistent global trajectory far-field estimation. In [28], the authors fused detection re-
sults from CNN with UWB data and VIO for relative positioning in drone clusters. Ref. [12]
fuses data from static UWB anchors, mutual ranging between drones, IMU and VIO to
improve the positioning accuracy of drones in GNSS-challenged environments. However,
this active vision-based approach cannot cope with urgent tasks.
The authors of [29] focused on collaborative localization of UGV and UAV teams, and
their method relied mainly on UWB and VIO data and used 3D LiDAR detection during
initialization. The authors of [30] utilized a heterogeneous team of UGVs carrying LiDAR
and camera-equipped drones with the goal of detecting UGVs from airborne cameras
on the drones and using them as a landmark for improving drone positioning. Ref. [31]
proposed a new cooperative localization framework based on optimized belief propagation
(BP) for use in GNSS denial areas, and ref. [32] proposed a technology to improve the
accuracy of visual inertial odometer (VIO) by combining ultra-wideband (UWB) positioning
technology. However, these methods all require the assistance of multiple UWB anchors,
which is not conducive to practical use; ref. [33] proposes a multi-drone relative scheme
based on distributed graph optimization (DGO), which combines on-board ultra-wideband
(UWB) modules, cameras and inertial sensors, but the cameras need to observe other drones
for position estimation, making it unsuitable for large-scale scenarios. Ref. [34] fuses the
data from these two types of sensors via the Kalman filter to address the positioning drift
problem in GPS-denied environments. Ref. [35] adopts the Information Consistency Filter
(ICF) to address the state estimation association problem among multiple devices. Ref. [36]
adopts a strategy of second-order Kalman filter preprocessing combined with EKF gating
fusion to tackle the sensor observation data with intermittency and time delay.
Therefore, considering the requirements of low cost, lightweight, and real-time per-
formance, we propose a distributed anchorless vision-inertial-UWB-magnetic multi-drone
collaborative positioning system. UAVs measure the distance between drones through
UWB. There is no need to rely on UWB anchors, and a filtering framework based on EKF is
used to fuse multiple observations, which enhances the lightweight and real-time nature of
the algorithm. In order to further improve the accuracy, we incorporate multiple UWB key
frames into the sliding window, and adopt an adaptive adjustment method for filtering
errors based on chi-squared detection. In addition, in terms of vision observation, we
adopt a visual observation model based on PO constraints, which improves the system’s
adaptability to challenging visual environments.
3. Methods
The proposed method is a distributed and anchor-free visual-inertial-UWB-magnetic
cooperative localization system for UAVs. It consists of three main components: a sliding
window extended Kalman filter framework for tightly fusing inertial, visual, Magnetic,
and UWB ranging data; an adaptive adjustment method for UWB measurements based on
chi-squared detection; and a visual observation model using pose-only (PO) theory.
3.1. Overview of the Architecture
The block diagram of the architecture of the proposed system is shown in Figure 1.
Each UAV is equipped with an IMU, a magnetometer, a camera and a UWB sensor, and the
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.6]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
6 of 30
UAVs can share each other’s position and relative distance information through communi-
cation links and UWB.
Figure 1. Architecture of the proposed distributed anchor-free cooperative localization system.
In the structural block diagram shown in Figure 1, feature tracking and extraction are
used to obtain environmental feature information, IMU data is used for state propagation
and enhancement to predict the motion state of the UAV, and basic views and sensor data
are used to build a visual observation model based on pure pose (PO) theory to improve
the accuracy of the algorithm. After the magnetometer is calibrated by the magnetic
sensor, it outputs heading angle information for subsequent fusion positioning. Then, the
information predicted by the filter is used to perform chi-squared detection on the UWB
data and filter out outliers. Finally, the state estimate of the UAV is updated by fusing
multiple sensor information in a tight combination method.
3.2. Multi-Sensor Time Synchronization and Delay Handling
In a multi-sensor fusion system for cooperative localization, precise time synchroniza-
tion is fundamental to estimation accuracy. The sensors in this system, including IMU,
camera, magnetometer (MAG), UWB, and inter-UAV position information, operate at dif-
ferent sampling frequencies and exhibit varying latencies. In distributed scenarios, wireless
communication delays introduce additional temporal uncertainties. We propose a time syn-
chronization and delay handling scheme built upon the sliding window EKF framework,
leveraging IMU’s high-frequency propagation capability for temporal alignment.
3.2.1. Time Synchronization for Onboard Sensors
All sensor measurements carry precise timestamps. When a measurement arrives at
time tm, the system state at this instant is obtained through IMU-driven interpolation. The
detailed steps of the algorithm are illustrated in Algorithm 1. Given filter states ˆxk at tk and
ˆxk+1 at tk+1 where tk < tm < tk+1:
ˆxm = ˆxk + tm −tk
tk+1 −tk
( ˆxk+1 −ˆxk)
(1)
The synchronized residual is then computed as:
r = z −h( ˆxm)
(2)
where h(·) is the measurement model.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.7]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
7 of 30
Algorithm 1 Multi-Sensor Time Synchronization and Delay Handling.
Require: Sliding window states {xk−N+1, . . . , xk}, timestamps, measurement z with times-
tamp tm
Ensure: Aligned state ˆxm or updated state xk
1: Onboard Sensor Synchronization
2: Find states xk at tk and xk+1 at tk+1 (tk < tm < tk+1)
3: ˆxm ←xk +
tm−tk
tk+1−tk (xk+1 −xk)
4: r ←z −h( ˆxm)
5: Inter-UAV Delay Handling
6: ∆t ←tr −tc
7: if ∆t > thresholdmax then
8:
Discard measurement
9: else
10:
xd ←Buffer[td], ν ←zd −hd(xd)
11:
Kd ←PdHT
d (HdPdHT
d + Rd)−1
12:
˜xd ←xd + Kdν
13:
Φk,d ←I + F∆t
14:
xk ←Φk,d ˜xd
15: end if
16: return Updated state
3.2.2. Delay Handling for Inter-UAV Information
In distributed cooperative localization, inter-UAV information suffers from commu-
nication delays. Let tc be the generation timestamp and tr the reception timestamp, with
delay ∆t = tr −tc. The delay handling mechanism consists of three steps.
State Storage: A sliding window buffer maintains historical states {xk−N+1, . . . , xk}
with timestamps {tk−N+1, . . . , tk}.
Backward Correction: Retrieve the historical state xd at timestamp td = tc from the
buffer and compute the innovation:
δxd = Kd(zd −hd(xd))
(3)
where Kd is the Kalman gain at td. The corrected state is ˜xd = xd + δxd.
Forward Propagation: Propagate ˜xd from td to the current time tk using the state
transition matrix:
xk = Φk,d ˜xd + Gk,dwd
(4)
where Φk,d ≈I + F∆t with F = ∂f
∂x being the Jacobian of the system dynamics.
For UWB ranging from neighboring UAVs with delay, the measurement model is:
zdelayed
UWB
= ∥plocal
k
−pneighbor
d
∥+ vUWB
(5)
where pneighbor
d
is the stored position at td, with uncertainty explicitly modeled in the
measurement noise.
This scheme achieves comprehensive temporal alignment: onboard sensors are syn-
chronized through IMU interpolation, while inter-UAV delays are handled through back-
ward correction and forward propagation, ensuring accurate cooperative localization under
communication delays.
3.3. Swarm Absolute Pose and Attitude Initialization
In multi-UAV swarm systems, accurate initialization of absolute positions and orienta-
tions is crucial for subsequent collaborative localization tasks. Traditional methods often
rely on GNSS or pre-deployed infrastructure, which are not available in GNSS-denied envi-
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.8]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
8 of 30
ronments. To address this challenge, we propose a novel swarm absolute pose initialization
method based on ranging and geomagnetic information.
Our approach utilizes IMU (Inertial Measurement Unit) to estimate roll and pitch an-
gles, magnetometer (compass) to estimate yaw angle, and inter-node ranging information to
estimate relative positions. These measurements are fused to estimate the absolute positions
and orientations of the UAV swarm in the ENU (East-North-Up) coordinate system.
The initialization process consists of two main steps:
First, individual UAV attitude estimation: Each UAV independently estimates its
attitude angles (roll, pitch, and yaw) in a static state. Roll and pitch angles are estimated
using accelerometer measurements:
roll0 = arctan 2
 gb[1]
gb[2]

,
pitch0 = arctan 2
 
−gb[0]
p
gb[1]2 + gb[2]2
!
(6)
where gb = [gx, gy, gz]T is the average gravity vector measured by the accelerometer in the
body frame.
Yaw angle is estimated using calibrated magnetometer measurements. The raw mag-
netometer readings are first calibrated to correct for environmental disturbances:


Mxx
Myx
Mzx

=


kxx
kxy
kxz
kyx
kyy
kyz
kzx
kzy
kzz

·





Mx
My
Mz

−


bmx
bmy
bmz





(7)
where kij are scale factors and cross-axis sensitivity coefficients, and bm are bias parameters.
The calibrated magnetometer measurements are then transformed to the navigation frame:
hn = R(roll0, pitch0, 0)−1 · mb
(8)
and the yaw angle is computed as:
yaw0 = arctan 2
hn[1]
hn[0]

−D
(9)
where D is the magnetic declination obtained from geomagnetic maps.
Second, initialization of absolute position: The first UAV in the swarm (i = 1) is selected
as the ENU coordinate origin P1 = [0, 0, 0]T. Then move the drone for a short distance, and
combine the output of VIO and the geomagnetic heading angle to obtain the displacement
vector of the drone in the ENU coordinate system. Then, the MDS-MAP method proposed
in this paper can be used to obtain the absolute position coordinates of the entire UAV
swarm under the ENU coordinate system. The pseudocode of Algorithm 2 is as follows.
This algorithm takes the number of UAV nodes, pre- and post-movement distance
matrices of Node 1, and its absolute displacement as inputs. It solves relative coordinates
via MDS, aligns coordinate systems using non-moving nodes, corrects orientation, and
applies global translation to output all nodes’ absolute positions, providing fast, robust,
and accurate initialization for swarm collaborative localization. There is also a commonly
used cluster position initialization method, which is to directly use ranging information
to build residuals, build a joint optimization problem and solve it. Its ranging residual
construction method is defined as ∑i,j ∥dij −∥Pi −Pj∥∥2 . Obviously, this approach will
introduce a large amount of non-convexity into the optimization problem, which may cause
the optimization problem to fall into a local optimal solution, resulting in a decrease in
final accuracy. However, the method proposed in this paper not only avoids the problem
of non-convex optimization by using algebraic methods but also greatly simplifies the
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.9]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
9 of 30
calculation and improves the computational efficiency. We will also conduct experimental
verification and analysis in the subsequent experimental evaluation process.
Algorithm 2 MDS-MAP Absolute Localization Algorithm.
1: function MDS_MAP_LOCALIZATION(N, Dpre, Dpost, ∆Xabs) N: Number of UAVs,
2: Dpre: Distance matrix before Node 1 moves,
3: Dpost: Distance matrix after Node 1 moves,
4: ∆Xabs: Node 1’s absolute displacement Xabs: Absolute positions of all UAVs
5:
1. Compute Relative Coordinates via MDS
6:
J = IN −1
N 1N1T
N
▷Centralization matrix
7:
Bpre = −1
2 JD2
preJ, [Vpre, Λpre] = eig(Bpre)
8:
Λsorted
pre
= sort(diag(Λpre), ’descend’)
9:
Xrel, pre = Vpre(:, 1 : 2) ×
q
max(Λsorted
pre
(1 : 2), 0)
10:
Bpost = −1
2 JD2
postJ, [Vpost, Λpost] = eig(Bpost)
11:
Λsorted
post
= sort(diag(Λpost), ’descend’)
12:
Xrel, post = Vpost(:, 1 : 2) ×
q
max(Λsorted
post (1 : 2), 0)
13:
2. Align Coordinate Systems
14:
S = {2, 3, ..., N}
▷Non-moving nodes
15:
cpre = mean(Xrel, pre(S, :)), cpost = mean(Xrel, post(S, :))
16:
Xcent
rel, pre = Xrel, pre −cpre, Xcent
rel, post = Xrel, post −cpost
17:
P = Xcent
rel, pre(S, :)TXcent
rel, post(S, :), [U, Σ, V] = svd(P), R = UVT
18:
Xalign
rel, post = (R × Xcent
rel, post
T)T + cpre
19:
3. Estimate Absolute Heading and Correct
20:
∆Xrel = Xalign
rel, post(1, :) −Xrel, pre(1, :)
21:
θrel = atan2(∆Xrel(2), ∆Xrel(1)), θabs = atan2(∆Xabs(2), ∆Xabs(1))
22:
ˆθ = θabs −θrel
23:
Ryaw =

cos ˆθ
−sin ˆθ
sin ˆθ
cos ˆθ

24:
Xrel, rot = (Ryaw × XT
rel, pre)T
25:
4. Compute Absolute Positions
26:
t = ∆Xabs −(Xrel, rot(1, :) −Xrel, pre(1, :))
▷Global translation
27:
Xabs = Xrel, rot + t
return Xabs
28: end function
3.4. Filter State and Propagation
In the proposed multi-UAV collaborative navigation system, we employ the sliding
window EKF for state estimation, which is developed from OpenVINS [37]. The state of
any drone in the drone cluster is defined as follows: The error state vector δx consists
of the current INS error parameter δxI, vision measurement key frame δxKFVisual, UWB
measurement key frame δxKFUWB, magnetic measurement key frame δxKFMAG, and single
time offset δcI between the IMU and the camera clock. They can be defined as:
δx =

δxI, δxKFVisual, δxKFUWB, δxKFMAG, δcI
T
(10)
where:
δxI =

δθw
b , δpw
b , δvw, δbg, δba

(11)
δxKFVisual =

δxKFVisual,0, δxKFVisual,1, . . . , δxKFVisual,N−1

(12)
δxKFUWB =

δxKFUWB,0, δxKFUWB,1, . . . , δxKFUWB,M−1

(13)
δxKFMAG =

δxKFMAG,0, δxKFMAG,1, . . . , δxKFMAG,M−1

(14)
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.10]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
10 of 30
Here, the current inertial localization error state δxI includes the attitude error δθw
b , po-
sition error δpw
b , speed error δvw, gyroscope deviation δbg and the accelerometer deviation
δba of the drone. The vision measurement key frame δxKFVisual and the UWB measurement
key frame δxKFUWB are defined as follows:
δxKFVisual,n =
h
δθw
bn, δpw
bn
i
(15)
δxKFUWB,m =
h
δθw
bm, δpw
bm
i
(16)
δxKFMAG,l =
h
δθw
bl, δpw
bl
i
(17)
where δθw
bn and δpw
bn are the IMU attitude and position errors at the n-th vision key frame
time. δθw
bm and δpw
bm are the IMU attitude and position errors at the m-th UWB key frame
time. δθw
bl and δpw
bl are the IMU attitude and position errors at the l-th MAG key frame
time. The true state x can be obtained from the estimated state ˆx and the error state δx:
x = ˆx ⊞δx
(18)
For the attitude error, the operator ⊞is given by
R = ˆRExp(δθ) ≈ˆR(I + (δθ)×)
(19)
For other states, the operator ⊞is equivalent to Euclidean addition. When the IMU measure-
ment is available, the INS mechanization is conducted to output the high-frequency prior
pose. Meanwhile, the forward propagation of the whole error state and its covariance is
similar to the OpenVINS [37] and will not be repeated here. When a new key frame is added
to the sliding window, state augmentation and covariance update are needed to enhance
the state into the state vector, and the corresponding covariance Pn×n is augmented as:
P(n+6)×(n+6) =
"
In×n
J6×n
#
Pn×n
"
In×n
J6×n
#T
(20)
where J6×n is the Jacobian matrix, which represents the relationship between the new
added state and the original state. When the sliding window exceeds its maximum length,
it will be marginalized and the state and covariance of the oldest keyframe will be directly
deleted [37].
3.5. Visual Measurement Based on PO Theory
In order to simplify the complexity of the 3D reconstruction process in the traditional
VIO system, to reduce the amount of computation, and to avoid the accuracy limitations
imposed by direct 3D reconstruction, with reference to the PO theory [38], we reconstructed
the measurement model represented only by pixel coordinates and relative positional pose.
In PO theory, the description of multi-view geometry can be realized by using only camera
poses. This means that instead of directly estimating the 3D coordinates of the feature
points in the scene, we infer their positional relationships from the relative poses between
the cameras. Assuming that the projection of feature point p in image i can be represented
as pi = K[Rij|tij]pj, where K is the camera internal reference matrix, Rij and tij are the
rotation and translation from camera i to camera j, respectively, the reprojection error ei can
be represented by the camera poses in PO theory without directly using the 3D coordinates
of the feature points.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.11]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
11 of 30
ei = pi −K[Rij|tij]pj
(21)
Therefore, the geometric description of multiple views based on PO theory can be expressed
as follows.
D(j, k) =
n
d(j, i) | pci = d(j, k)ciRcj pcj + citcj | 1 ≤i ≤n, i̸ = j
o
(22)
where d(j, i) is the constraint between images i and j, pci is the normalized coordinates of
the feature points in images i, and ciRcj and citcj are the rotation and translation from image
i to image j, respectively. Thus the reprojection error can be redefined as follows [38,39].
r(l)
ci =



p(l)
ci −ˆp(l)
ci



 =







ci p(PO)
fl
eT
3
ci p(PO)
fl
−p(l)
ci







(23)
where r(l)
ci is the reprojection error of the l-th feature point in the i-th image, ci p(PO)
fl
is the
projection obtained by using only the camera pose and 2D features, and eT
3 is a transforma-
tion vector for converting 3D vectors to 2D. Thus the measurement model based on PO
theory can be represented as follows [13].
r(l)
ci ≈H(l)
xi δx + n(l)
i
(24)
H(l)
xi =
∂r(l)
Ci
∂δx =
∂r(l)
Ci
∂Ci p(PO)
fl
·
∂Ci p(PO)
fl
∂δx
=


1
eT
3
Ci p(PO)
fl
0
−
eT
1
Ci p(PO)
fl

eT
3
Ci p(PO)
fl
2
0
1
eT
3
Ci p(PO)
fl
−
eT
2
Ci p(PO)
fl

eT
3
Ci p(PO)
fl
2


·

03×15
∂Ci p(PO)
fl
∂G
bm ϕ
∂Ci p(PO)
fl
∂δG pbm
. . .

(25)
As a result, the new measurement model is represented only in pixel coordinates and system
attitude and is fully decoupled from the 3D features, avoiding the effects of inaccurate 3D
reconstruction processes. The PO-based visual measurement model significantly reduces
the computational complexity and avoids the error accumulation caused by 3D point
reconstruction while maintaining high positioning accuracy.
3.6. Collaborative Localization with Anchor-Free UWB Measurement and Magnetic Assisted
This section presents our collaborative localization framework that tightly integrates
anchor-free UWB measurements and magnetic heading constraints. The framework shown
in Figure 2 addresses the challenges of unknown correlations between UAV state estimates
and robustly handles measurement noise and uncertainties.
3.6.1. Magnetic Heading Assisted Localization
Magnetic sensors provide valuable absolute heading information that helps constrain
the unobservable yaw dimension identified in our observability analysis. Here we detail
the magnetic heading measurement model and robustness enhancements.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.12]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
12 of 30
Figure 2. Schematic diagram of UAVs using UWB measurements for collaboration.
Magnetic Heading Measurement Model
The geomagnetic heading provides an absolute measurement of the yaw angle in the
IMU state, with the following measurement model:
ψo(t) = ψ(t) + nm(t)
(26)
where nm(t) is Gaussian white noise and ψo(t) is the observed heading at time t. The
residual between the estimated heading ψe(t) and geomagnetic heading in the filter is:
r = ψo(t) −ψe(t)
(27)
The Jacobian matrix for the heading measurement is straightforward:
Hmag =
h
0
0
1
i
(28)
Robust Magnetic Heading Estimation
To enhance the reliability of magnetic heading estimation in challenging environments,
we implement five key strategies with corresponding mathematical formulations:
1.
Magnetic Calibration
We perform automatic pre-mission calibration to compensate for hard and soft iron
distortions. The calibration process estimates the following parameters:
-
Hard iron bias: b = [bx, by, bz]T
-
Soft iron matrix: S =


sxx
sxy
sxz
syx
syy
syz
szx
szy
szz


The calibrated magnetic field vector mcal is computed as:
mcal = S(mraw −b)
(29)
2.
Adaptive Magnetic Weighting
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.13]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
13 of 30
The weight wmag for magnetic measurements is dynamically adjusted based on consis-
tency with IMU and visual data:
wmag = exp
 
−∥ψmag −ψre f ∥2
2σ2
consist
!
(30)
where ψre f is the reference heading from IMU/visual fusion and σconsist is the consis-
tency threshold.
3.
Magnetic Anomaly Detection
We detect magnetic anomalies by comparing current measurements with geomagnetic
map predictions:
ζ = ∥mcal −mmap∥
σmap
(31)
Measurements are rejected if ζ > ζthresh, where ζthresh is the anomaly threshold.
4.
Heading Complementary Filter
A complementary filter fuses magnetic heading ψmag with gyroscope-derived head-
ing ψgyro:
ψcomp(t) = α · ψcomp(t −1) + (1 −α) · ψmag(t) + β · ω(t)
(32)
where ω(t) is the gyroscope angular velocity, and α, β are filter gains (0 < α < 1, β > 0).
5.
Multi-Sensor Heading Fusion
When magnetic measurements are unreliable, we fuse heading estimates from multiple
sensors using weighted least squares:
ψf used =
 
K
∑
k=1
wkHT
k R−1
k Hk
!−1
K
∑
k=1
wkHT
k R−1
k ψk
(33)
where K is the number of sensors, ψk are individual heading estimates, Rk are their covari-
ance matrices, and wk are adaptive weights.
3.6.2. Anchor-Free UWB Measurement Model
UWB sensors provide direct peer-to-peer distance measurements between neighboring
UAVs, which are crucial for maintaining relative position consistency in the swarm.
Basic UWB Measurement Model
For UAV i and its neighbor j, the UWB ranging measurement is modeled as:
dij = ∥pi −pj∥+ vuwb,ij
(34)
where pi and pj are the positions of UAV i and j in the global frame, and vuwb,ij is Gaussian
measurement noise.
Cumulative UWB Measurement with Neighbor Uncertainty
In distributed systems, neighboring UAVs’ position estimates contain uncertainties.
We model these uncertainties by constructing a cumulative UWB measurement for UAV i
with M neighbors:
ri = ∑
j∈Ni
wij

∥˜pi
G −˜pj
G∥−dij + nij

(35)
where Ni is the set of neighboring UAVs, wij are dynamically adjusted weights (satisfying
∑j∈Ni wij = 1) and ˜pi
G represents the estimated position.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.14]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
14 of 30
The Jacobian matrix for this cumulative measurement is:
HUWBi = ∑
j∈Ni
wij
"
xi −xj
dij
yi −yj
dij
zi −zj
dij
−xi −xj
dij
−yi −yj
dij
−zi −zj
dij
#
(36)
Uncertainty Propagation from Neighbors
We explicitly model the uncertainty introduced by neighboring UAVs’ position errors.
The observation noise matrix for the cumulative UWB measurement is:
RUWBi = δ2
d + ∑
j∈Ni
w2
ijHUWBijPpj
GHT
UWBij
(37)
where δ2
d is the UWB ranging noise variance, and Ppj
G is the position covariance matrix of
UAV j.
3.6.3. Covariance Intersection (CI) for Consistent UWB Fusion
To address unknown correlations between UAV state estimates, we incorporate Co-
variance Intersection (CI) into our UWB measurement fusion process.
CI Fusion Principle
When fusing state estimate ˆxj with covariance Pj from UAV j with local estimate ˆxi
and Pi, CI computes the fused state ˆxCI and covariance PCI as:
P−1
CI = (1 −α)P−1
i
+ αP−1
j
(38)
ˆxCI = PCI

(1 −α)P−1
i
ˆxi + αP−1
j
ˆxj

(39)
The optimal mixing parameter α∗minimizes the trace of PCI while maintaining consistency:
α∗= arg min
α∈[0,1] tr(PCI(α))
(40)
CI-Enhanced Measurement Noise
The CI-derived covariance is incorporated into the UWB measurement noise matrix:
RCI
UWBi = δ2
d + ∑
j∈Ni
w2
ijHUWBijPCIjHT
UWBij
(41)
The CI method ensures that the fused state estimate is consistent even when the corre-
lations between UAV estimates are unknown or time-varying, enhancing the robustness
and consistency of our cooperative localization system.
3.6.4. Integrated UWB Range Update Algorithm
Algorithm 3 integrates CI fusion, chi-squared validation, and EKF update into a
comprehensive UWB range update process:
This integrated algorithm ensures robust and consistent fusion of UWB measurements
in our anchor-free collaborative localization system, effectively constraining the divergence
of unobservable dimensions identified in our observability analysis.
The ranging-aided SLAM (RA-SLAM) problem introduces additional non-convexity
due to distance measurement models, making it challenging to obtain globally optimal
solutions. The maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation of RA-SLAM is a non-convex opti-
mization problem that heavily relies on good initial values. Traditional methods for solving
this problem often face challenges such as local optima and high computational complexity.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.15]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
15 of 30
Algorithm 3 UWB Range Update with Chi-squared Test and Covariance Intersection Fusion.
1: function UWBRangeUpdate(Zk, ˆXi, Pi, { ˆXj, Pj}j∈Ni) Zk: UWB measurement, ˆXi: Local
state estimate, Pi: Local covariance, { ˆXj, Pj}j∈Ni: Neighbor states and covariances
ˆXupdated
i
: Updated state estimate, Pupdated
i
: Updated covariance
2:
1. Covariance Intersection Fusion
3:
for all j ∈Ni do
4:
α∗= arg minα∈[0,1] tr(PCI(α))
▷Optimal fusion weight
5:
P−1
CIj = (1 −α∗)P−1
i
+ α∗P−1
j
▷Fused covariance
6:
ˆXCIj = PCIj

(1 −α∗)P−1
i
ˆXi + α∗P−1
j
ˆXj

▷Fused state
7:
RCI
UWBij = δ2
d + w2
ijHUWBijPCIjHT
UWBij
▷CI-enhanced noise
8:
end for
9:
RUWB = ∑j∈Ni wijRCI
UWBij
▷Total noise matrix
10:
2. Chi-squared Measurement Validation
11:
r = Zk −h( ˆXi)
▷Innovation
12:
S = HPiHT + RUWB
▷Innovation covariance
13:
χ2 = rTS−1r
▷Chi-squared statistic
14:
3. Conditional EKF Update
15:
if χ2 < χ2
thresh then
16:
[ ˆXupdated
i
, Pupdated
i
] = EKFUpdate( ˆXi, Pi, r, H, S)
17:
else
18:
[ ˆXupdated
i
, Pupdated
i
] = [ ˆXi, Pi]
▷Reject unreliable measurement
19:
end if
return ˆXupdated
i
, Pupdated
i
20: end function
3.7. UWB Measurements Adaptive Adjustment Based on Chi-Squared Detection
In practical applications, UWB ranging measurements are often affected by non-line-
of-sight (NLOS) propagation, multipath effects, and other environmental factors, resulting
in outliers that can severely degrade localization performance. To address this issue, we
propose an adaptive adjustment method for UWB measurements based on chi-squared
detection, with alternative strategies when the chi-squared test fails.
For each UWB measurement, the innovation (residual) is computed as:
yk = Zk −Hk ˆXk|k−1
(42)
where Zk is the measurement vector, Hk is the observation matrix, and ˆXk|k−1 is the pre-
dicted state vector. The innovation covariance matrix and chi-squared statistic are then
computed as:
Sk = HkPk|k−1HT
k + Rk
(43)
λk = yT
k S−1
k yk
(44)
where Pk|k−1 is the a priori error covariance matrix of the Kalman filter, and Rk is the
observation noise covariance matrix. In this article, the threshold of the chi-squared test is
set to 95%, and the dimension of the residual vector is 6, so the corresponding threshold
is 12.59.
When the chi-squared test fails (i.e., λk ≥χ2(0.95)), our system implements a weighted
measurement update strategy instead of completely rejecting the measurement. The weight
assigned to the measurement is inversely proportional to the chi-squared statistic:
wuwb = exp
 
−λk −χ2
thresh
2σ2
uwb
!
(45)
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.16]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
16 of 30
where σuwb is the UWB measurement noise parameter. This approach allows for slightly
inconsistent measurements to still contribute to the state update with reduced influence,
while strongly inconsistent measurements are effectively downweighted.
Finally, each UAV uses the standard EKF update formula with the computed weight
to update UWB measurements and obtain state estimates after collaborative positioning.
3.8. Observability Analysis for Ranging + Odometry Swarm Systems
We conduct a rigorous observability analysis for anchor-free UAV swarms with only
inter-UAV ranging and on-board odometry, deriving key properties for professional readers.
For a swarm with N UAVs, the state vector x = [xT
1 , xT
2 , . . . , xT
N]T includes each UAV’s
position pi = [xi, yi, zi]T, velocity vi, attitude qi, and IMU biases bi. Measurements include:
1.
On-board odometry (relative motion)
2.
Inter-UAV UWB ranging dij = ∥pi −pj∥+ vuwb,ij
Consider a global transformation τ = [δxG, δyG, δzG, δψG]T representing 3D transla-
tion and yaw rotation. Applying this to the swarm state:
p′
i = Ry(δψG)pi + [δxG, δyG, δzG]T
(46)
v′
i = Ry(δψG)vi
(47)
q′
i = qi ⊗qy(δψG)
(48)
This transformation leaves all measurements invariant:
-
Odometry measurements depend only on relative motion, so v′
i produces identical
measurements to vi
-
Ranging measurements are preserved: ∥p′
i −p′
j∥= ∥pi −pj∥(rotation matrices
preserve Euclidean distance)
The observability matrix O for the linearized system is constructed as:
O =


H
HF
HF2
...
HFn−1


(49)
where H is the combined measurement matrix, F is the block-diagonal state transition
matrix, and n = 16N is the total state dimension.
Since τ leaves all measurements invariant, it lies in the null space of O. This yields:
Theorem 1. For an anchor-free UAV swarm with only inter-UAV ranging and on-board odometry,
and without initial absolute pose information, the absolute heading (yaw) and absolute position (3D
translation) are unobservable, resulting in 4 unobservable dimensions.
The rank of O is thus at most 16N −4, confirming the unobservable subspace.
While the 4 unobservable dimensions are fundamental, the divergence rate of these
directions can be constrained. This is the core motivation for our absolute accuracy improve-
ment mechanism: through strategic sensor fusion and drift mitigation, we can significantly
slow the divergence of the unobservable directions, thereby improving absolute positioning
accuracy without changing the fundamental observability properties.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.17]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
17 of 30
3.9. Analysis of Absolute Accuracy Improvement Mechanism in Anchor-Free Collaborative Localization
Building upon the observability analysis, we now analyze how our proposed sys-
tem improves the absolute positioning accuracy of anchor-free UAV swarms, even in the
presence of 4 unobservable dimensions. While the fundamental unobservability cannot
be eliminated without external absolute references, our research demonstrates that the
absolute positioning accuracy can be significantly enhanced and network drift can be
mitigated through three key mechanisms: (1) accurate absolute pose initialization using
MDS-based methods fused with ranging, IMU, and geomagnetic information; (2) contin-
uous accuracy improvement through multi-constraint fusion in a sliding window EKF
framework; and (3) explicit network drift mitigation strategies. These mechanisms effec-
tively constrain the divergence rate of the unobservable directions, leading to improved
absolute positioning accuracy.
3.9.1. Swarm Initialization with Absolute Pose Estimation
As detailed in Section 3.2, our MDS-MAP initialization approach utilizes ranging
measurements, IMU data, and geomagnetic information to establish accurate absolute
positions for all UAVs at the beginning of the mission. This initialization process is crucial
as it provides each UAV with a globally consistent reference frame, which serves as the
foundation for subsequent collaborative localization. The accurate initialization of the
swarm’s absolute pose significantly enhances the overall absolute positioning accuracy of
the UAV cluster. By establishing a precise initial reference frame, the accumulated errors in
subsequent navigation can be minimized, leading to more reliable and accurate positioning
throughout the mission.
3.9.2. Continuous Accuracy Enhancement Through Multi-Constraint Fusion
During system operation, the sliding window EKF framework continuously fuses
multiple sensor constraints to improve estimation accuracy and maintain long-term stability.
The augmented state vector includes keyframes from visual and UWB measurements:
δx =

δxI, δxKFVisual, δxKFUWB, δxKFMAG
T
(50)
The observation model combines visual, ranging, and geomagnetic measurements:
zk =


zvis
zuwb
zmag

=


hvis(x)
huwb(x)
hmag(x)

+


nvis
nuwb
nmag


(51)
This multi-constraint fusion significantly increases the rank of the information matrix,
thereby improving the observability and accuracy of the system state estimation. The
increased redundancy in measurements also enhances robustness against individual sensor
failures or noise. Specifically:
1.
Visual constraints provide high-frequency relative motion information and help
correct drift in the inertial navigation system.
2.
UWB ranging constraints offer direct peer-to-peer distance measurements, which are
particularly valuable for maintaining inter-UAV positional consistency in the swarm.
3.
Geomagnetic constraints supply absolute heading information, which is essential for
maintaining global orientation consistency.
3.9.3. Network Drift Mitigation Strategies
Building upon our observability analysis, we now focus on how our system constrains
the divergence rate of the 4 unobservable dimensions. While the fundamental unobservabil-
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.18]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
18 of 30
ity cannot be eliminated, our proposed strategies effectively mitigate the drift in these unob-
servable directions, thereby improving the absolute positioning accuracy. We implement
three key strategies that directly address the divergence of the unobservable dimensions:
1.
Absolute Heading Constraint: By continuously incorporating geomagnetic mea-
surements into the fusion framework, we provide a stable absolute reference for the
swarm’s heading. While this does not change the fundamental unobservability of the
yaw angle, it effectively constrains the divergence rate of the absolute heading. The
geomagnetic measurements act as a virtual anchor for the yaw direction, preventing
the entire swarm from rotating uncontrollably and maintaining consistent heading
estimates across all UAVs.
2.
Relative Distance Consistency: The UWB ranging measurements between neighbor-
ing UAVs provide strong constraints on the relative positions of the swarm members.
These constraints effectively limit the divergence of the unobservable translational
dimensions. While the entire swarm can still translate rigidly, the relative distance
constraints ensure that this translation occurs in a coordinated manner, preventing
the swarm from dispersing and maintaining the relative formation. This coordinated
behavior significantly reduces the effective drift rate of the absolute position estimates.
3.
Sliding Window Marginalization: The sliding window mechanism maintains a his-
tory of past states and measurements, allowing the system to detect and correct drift
over time through loop closure-like effects. By marginalizing older states while retain-
ing their information in the covariance matrix, the system creates implicit constraints
that limit the divergence of all states, including the unobservable dimensions. The
sliding window effectively extends the temporal horizon of the system, providing long-
term consistency constraints that slow down the drift of the unobservable directions.
Collectively, these strategies effectively constrain the divergence rate of the 4 unobserv-
able dimensions, even though they cannot eliminate the fundamental unobservability. By
limiting the drift rate, our system significantly improves the absolute positioning accuracy
of the swarm, making it suitable for practical applications in GNSS-denied environments.
3.10. Scalability Analysis
Through a series of key design considerations, this system achieves favorable scala-
bility for large-scale unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) swarms. Specifically, the Pose-Only
(PO) theory improves computational efficiency by eliminating the need for 3D feature re-
construction; the sliding-window EKF limits the number of estimated states; and localized
processing ensures a linear scaling of computational load. In addition, the system mitigates
communication latency and packet loss via time alignment, synchronization, and delay
compensation within the sliding window. For future deployment expansion, in terms of
communication overhead, each UAV only communicates with neighboring UAVs within its
communication range, thus ensuring a linear scaling of communication burden. A dynamic
neighbor selection strategy further restricts communication to the nearest K neighbors.
Regarding UWB signal management, the system implements the Time Division Multiple
Access (TDMA) protocol and Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS) technology to
avoid signal collisions in dense swarms. Analysis results show that this system can support
swarms of 100 UAVs with appropriate parameter tuning, and is expected to accommodate
even larger swarms through additional optimizations such as hierarchical communication
and UWB modulation enhancement.
4. Experimental Evaluation
This section provides a comprehensive performance evaluation of our proposed
collaborative navigation framework and benchmarks it against the SOTA VIO method
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.19]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
19 of 30
and collaborative positioning method, which are commonly used for drone positioning in
GNSS-denied situations. Experimental validation was conducted using datasets collected
from both the AirSim simulation platform and real-world environments. All evaluations
were performed on a laptop configuration (13th Gen Intel® Core™i9-13900HX 2.20 GHz
processor) to ensure practical applicability. This paper employs EVO (Python package
for the evaluation of odometry and SLAM), version 1.12.0, for data assessment. When
creating visualizations, this study utilizes Python 3.9 and the Matplotlib plotting library
(version 3.6.3).
4.1. Swarm Position Initialization Simulation Experiment
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed MDS-MAP-based swarm absolute posi-
tion initialization method, we conducted comparative experiments against the traditional
GTSAM-based optimization approach that builds ranging information residuals. We simu-
lated 12 nodes, set the ranging error to 0.5 m, 500 Montocaro experiments, and the final
results were averaged. Multiple Monte Carlo simulations were performed to evaluate both
methods in terms of average positioning accuracy and computational time.
The traditional approach formulates the initialization problem as a non-linear opti-
mization task by constructing ranging residuals defined as ∑i,j ∥dij −∥Pi −Pj∥∥2, where
dij represents the measured distance between UAVs i and j, and Pi, Pj are their respective
absolute positions. This optimization problem is solved using the GTSAM library, which
iteratively minimizes the residuals to estimate the absolute positions.
In contrast, our proposed MDS-MAP method avoids the non-convexity issues inherent
in the optimization approach by employing algebraic methods based on Multidimensional
Scaling (MDS) and coordinate alignment techniques. This approach directly computes
the relative positions using MDS, aligns the coordinate systems using non-moving nodes,
estimates the absolute heading, and finally solves for the absolute positions through global
translation. Experimental results, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Comparison of Swarm Absolute Position Initialization Methods.
Method
Mean Error (m)
Variance
95% CI
Mean Time (ms)
GTSAM
0.34
0.045
[0.32, 0.36]
152.6
MDS-MAP (Ours)
0.19
0.012
[0.18, 0.20]
25.8
The results in Table 1 clearly show that our proposed MDS-MAP method achieves
44.1% reduction in positioning error and more than 80% reduction in computation time
compared to the GTSAM-based optimization approach. To provide more reliable statistical
results, we have included error variance and 95% confidence intervals based on 500 Monte
Carlo simulations. These improvements are attributed to the elimination of non-convex
optimization challenges and the adoption of efficient algebraic computations instead of
iterative optimization procedures.
4.2. Swarm Cooperative Localization Simulation Experiment
To verify the effectiveness of the new architecture, we conducted simulation experi-
ments based on the AirSim platform. Since the AirSim platform does not have UWB data
simulation, we added Gaussian white noise with a mean of 0.3 m based on the true distance
to simulate and generate UWB data. The parameter settings of the simulation experiment
are shown in Table 2, and the simulation scenarios and ground truth trajectories are shown
in Figure 3.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.20]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
20 of 30
Table 2. Sensors carried by the UAV platform in simulation experiments.
Sensors
Data Frequency
Parameters
Camera
10 Hz
Resolution: 752 × 480 pixels
View angle: 90°
IMU
100 Hz
In-run bias stability of Gyroscope: 10◦/h
Noise density of Gyroscope: 1◦/s/
√
Hz
In-run bias stability of Accelerometer: 2000 µg
Noise density of Accelerometer: 200 µg/
√
Hz
UWB
10 Hz
Range accuracy: 0.3 m
Maximum range: 500 m
Magnetometer
50 Hz
Resolution: 0.1°
Figure 3. (a) UAV flight environment in simulation experiments. (b) Motion trajectories of the 6 UAV
in simulation experiments.
In the simulation experiment, “VINS-Mono” and “OpenVINS” represent the two
SOTA VIO methods in [37,40], “SuperVINS” represents the SOTA VIO method based deep
learning proposed in [41], “COO_VIR” represents the collaborative localization method
proposed in [12], “COVINS-G” represents the collaborative localization method proposed
in [11], and “COO_OUR” represents the method proposed in this paper. The statistics of
drone positioning root-mean-square error (RMSE) results are shown in Table 3. Since this
paper is aimed at drones operating in a large-scale outdoor environment and requires real-
time positioning information output, when comparing it with OpenVINS and VINS-Mono
algorithms, loop back repositioning is not considered.
Table 3. RMSE of the position in extended simulation experiments with 6 UAVs, in meters.
Method
UAV1
UAV2
UAV3
UAV4
UAV5
UAV6
Avg.
VINS-Mono
6.12
11.45
9.21
8.76
10.34
9.87
9.30
OpenVINS
5.87
12.01
8.67
9.12
11.05
10.43
9.53
SuperVINS
5.21
9.78
7.98
8.23
9.12
8.65
8.16
COVINS-G
5.43
9.23
7.56
7.89
8.92
8.15
7.86
COO_VIR
4.89
8.67
7.12
7.45
8.21
7.73
7.35
COO_OUR
3.78
6.23
5.89
6.12
6.45
5.97
5.74
As shown in Table 3, in the simulation experiment with 6 UAVs, our method outperforms
all other methods. This indicates that our method not only achieves excellent positioning
accuracy for each individual UAV but also maintains stable performance in the multi-UAV
system, verifying its robustness and effectiveness in extended simulation scenarios.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.21]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
21 of 30
4.3. Vision Loss Experiment
To verify the efficacy of the proposed algorithm in scenarios with visual loss, we
conducted experiments by introducing partial visual loss into the simulation framework
established in the previous section, as illustrated in Figure 4, the curves with different colors
in the figure represent the trajectories of six different drones respectively, which is consistent
with Figure 3. The bold part of the curve indicates visual disconnection, and the duration
of visual disconnection is 10 s. Unless otherwise specified, the experimental settings,
including but not limited to parameters, configurations, and environmental conditions,
were consistent with those outlined in the preceding simulation experiment.
Figure 4. Trajectory containing visual loss, the six different colored trajectories represent six drones
respectively, refer to Figure 3 for details.
In the simulated vision loss experiment, the UAV’s positioning results are shown in
Table 4. It can be seen that COVINS completely failed during the vision loss period as
it relies entirely on continuous visual input. The COO_VIR method showed significant
performance degradation with an average RMSE of 19.47 m, which is more than triple the
error compared to our method. This degradation occurs because these methods heavily
depend on the continuous operation of the VIO system, and when vision is lost, the VIO
system fails to function properly, causing significant deviation in the overall system’s posi-
tioning results. In contrast, our proposed method can effectively handle vision deprivation,
maintaining an average accuracy of 6.91 m, which is comparable to the results achieved
in normal conditions as shown in Table 3. This demonstrates that our system maintains
robust performance even under adverse visual conditions by leveraging the coupled fusion
of UWB ranging and IMU data.
Table 4. Positioning RMSE (m) in the vision loss simulation experiment.
Method
UAV1
UAV2
UAV3
UAV4
UAV5
UAV6
Avg.
COVINS
Failed
Failed
Failed
Failed
Failed
Failed
Failed
COO_VIR
12.78
22.98
18.76
19.32
22.54
20.43
19.47
COO_OUR
5.72
7.55
6.81
7.34
7.59
6.44
6.91
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.22]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
22 of 30
4.4. UWB Abnormal Experiment
To further evaluate the robustness of the proposed method under abnormal UWB
conditions, we conducted additional simulation experiments that emulate two typical
UWB failures in GNSS-denied outdoor environments: (1) UWB signal loss (no ranging
output) and (2) UWB non-line-of-sight (NLOS) ranging bias. Unless otherwise specified,
the simulation settings (sensor rates, trajectories, and evaluation protocol) are identical to
those in the swarm cooperative localization simulation experiment (Table 2).
(1)
UWB signal loss
In this experiment, the UWB ranging packets are assumed to be completely lost
during several time intervals, i.e., no distance measurements are available for the EKF
update. Practically, this is implemented by dropping the UWB measurements so that the
filter performs propagation and updates only with the remaining sensors (IMU, vision,
and magnetometer). The UWB loss intervals are highlighted by the bold red segments
in Figure 5.
(2)
UWB NLOS with positive bias (3–5 m)
Relevant studies have demonstrated that in NLOS scenarios, UWB ranging measure-
ments may generate values larger than the true ones owing to the multipath effect. To
model NLOS-induced ranging errors, we add a positive bias to the true inter-UAV distance
during NLOS intervals. Specifically, for each inter-UAV link i–j, the corrupted ranging
measurement is generated as
˜dij = dtrue
ij
+ bij + nij,
bij ∼U(3, 5) m,
nij ∼N (0, σ2
d)
(52)
where dtrue
ij
is the ground-truth distance, bij is a random positive bias uniformly sampled
from 3 to 5 m, and nij is zero-mean Gaussian noise with σd = 0.3 m, consistent with the
nominal UWB setting. The NLOS intervals are highlighted by the bold black segments
in Figure 5.
Figure 5. Trajectories under UWB abnormal conditions. The blue curve denotes the normal trajectory,
while the bold red and bold black segments indicate UWB signal loss and UWB NLOS periods, re-
spectively, the six different colored trajectories represent six drones respectively, refer to Figure 3
for details.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.23]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
23 of 30
In the simulated UWB abnormality experiment, the UAV’s positioning results are
shown in Table 5. It can be seen that COO_VIR achieved an average RMSE of 11.39 m.
This degradation occurs because these methods heavily depend on UWB ranging data for
collaborative positioning, and when UWB data is lost or contains large errors, the system’s
positioning accuracy is significantly affected.
Table 5. Positioning RMSE (m) in the UWB abnormality simulation experiment.
Method
UAV1
UAV2
UAV3
UAV4
UAV5
UAV6
Avg.
COO_VIR
8.23
11.12
10.89
12.01
12.34
13.76
11.39
COO_OUR
4.12
6.56
6.34
7.11
7.67
7.03
6.47
COO_OUR (without_UWB_AA)
5.89
8.43
8.12
9.26
9.87
8.75
8.39
Our proposed method with UWB adaptive adjustment (UWB_AA) strategy can ef-
fectively handle UWB abnormalities, maintaining an average accuracy of 6.47 m. To
demonstrate the effectiveness of our chi-squared detection based UWB_AA strategy, we
conducted an ablation experiment by removing this strategy, resulting in COO_OUR (with-
out_UWB_AA) with an average RMSE of 8.39 m. This shows that the chi-squared detection
based UWB_AA strategy contributes to a significant accuracy improvement of 1.92 m in
UWB abnormality scenarios.
The superior performance is attributed to two key factors: (1) our system adopts a
multi-modal fusion approach that integrates visual, inertial, and magnetic sensor data,
which can compensate for the loss or errors of UWB data; (2) our chi-squared detection
method effectively filters out UWB outliers, further improving the system’s robustness to
UWB abnormalities.
To further demonstrate the effectiveness of our chi-squared detection method in
identifying abnormal UWB measurements, we conducted a statistical analysis of the UWB
data processing results. The abnormality criterion is defined as follows: if the error between
the UWB measurement and the ground truth is greater than 1 m, the measurement is
considered abnormal. The statistical results for the simulation experiment are shown
in Table 6.
Table 6. Statistical analysis of UWB anomaly detection performance in simulation experiment.
Statistic Index
Simulation Experiment
Anomaly ratio in raw UWB data
20.0%
Correctly identified anomaly ratio
18.6%
Anomaly detection rate
93%
Table 6 shows that in the simulation experiment, our chi-squared detection method
achieves a high anomaly detection rate of 93%. Specifically, 20.0% of the raw UWB data are
abnormal, and our method correctly identifies 18.6% of them. Since the same proportion
of UWB measurement anomalies was set for each UAV in the simulation experiment,
a single set of statistics is sufficient to represent the overall performance. This result
clearly demonstrates the effectiveness of our chi-squared detection method in filtering out
abnormal UWB measurements, which is crucial for improving the robustness and accuracy
of the cooperative localization system in simulation scenarios.
4.5. Physical System Construction
In order to verify the practical application capabilities of the algorithm, this research
builds a distributed multi-drone collaborative localization hardware platform. The col-
laborative localization platform integrates multi-modal sensors and carries out clock syn-
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.24]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
24 of 30
chronization, and has a built-in embedded computing module that can process sensor
data in real time. The platform can be mounted on a small quad-rotor drone, and re-
alizes status information sharing and UWB ranging data interaction through a wireless
communication module.
The hardware architecture is shown in Figure 6, which mainly includes the following
modules: (1) Vision module: Equipped with FLIR Blackfly S USB3 global shutter camera,
microsecond time synchronization between IMU and camera is achieved through hardware
trigger signals (FLIR Systems, Inc., Wilsonville, OR, USA). (2) Inertial module: MEMS-
IMU is used to output 200 Hz raw data of gyroscope, accelerometer, and magnetometer
(Ruiyan Xinchuang Technology Co., Ltd., Chengdu, Sichuan, China). (3) UWB module: The
ranging frequency is 10 Hz, and the accuracy of 0.3 m in dynamic environments is achieved
through TDoA technology (Air Recycling Technology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, Guangdong,
China). (4) RTK positioning module: Integrated RTK-GNSS module (positioning accuracy
of 2 cm) as a truth reference and is only enabled during the algorithm evaluation stage
(Ruiyan Xinchuang Technology Co., Ltd., Chengdu, Sichuan, China). (5) Main processor:
Select the RK3588 (Rockchip Electronics Co., Ltd., Fuzhou, Fujian, China) embedded
computing module to meet the real-time computing requirements of the sliding window
EKF framework. The parameters of each module are shown in Table 7. The UAVs are
each equipped with a compact communication station, which provides a communication
bandwidth of no less than 50 Mbps and a communication range exceeding 10 km. Since
the proposed cooperative method only requires the sharing of positional data and ranging
information, without the need for transmitting image data, this communication setup
adequately fulfills the operational requirements.
Figure 6. Collaborative localization physical system hardware platform.
Table 7. Sensors carried by the UAV platform in real-world experiments.
Sensors
Data Frequency
Parameters
Camera
10 Hz
Resolution: 1280 × 1024 pixels
IMU
100 Hz
In-run bias stability of Gyroscope: 10◦/h
Noise density of Gyroscope: 1◦/s/
√
Hz
In-run bias stability of Accelerometer: 2000 µg
Noise density of Accelerometer: 200 µg
√
Hz
UWB
10 Hz
Range accuracy: 0.3 m
Maximum range: 500 m
Magnetometer
50 Hz
Resolution: 0.1°
Barometer
20 Hz
Accuracy: 10 cm
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.25]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
25 of 30
4.6. Real-World Experiment
To prove the practicality of the system proposed in this paper in real-world scenarios,
we conducted a real-world collaborative localization experiment. A total of three drones
were flown during the experiment. The flight trajectory of the drones is shown in Figure 7b.
The sensor parameters carried by the drone are shown in Table 7. The experimental
environment is an outdoor scene, as shown in Figure 7a. The drones are equipped with
high-precision RTK positioning equipment as the ground truth reference. In the real-world
experiment, the images captured by the drone camera are shown in Figure 8. It can be
seen that compared with indoor UAVs, outdoor UAVs operate at higher altitudes, where
only downward-facing cameras can capture continuous scenes and feature points are
typically tens of meters away. This renders the accuracy of VIO significantly susceptible
to environmental factors and reduced, thereby necessitating multi-UAV collaboration to
improve accuracy.
In order to verify several innovative points of the method proposed in this paper,
especially the novel processing methods for both UWB and visual measurements, ablation
experiments with different settings were also carried out.
Figure 7. (a) UAVs in the experiment. (b) Motion trajectories of the three UAVs (RTK). (c) Comparison
of UWB measured distance and real distance between UAV 1 and UAV 2.
Figure 8. Images captured by UAV cameras in real-world experiments.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.26]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
26 of 30
Table 8 shows a detailed evaluation of positioning errors for real-world experi-
ments, where “COO (ours)” represents the algorithm proposed in this paper, “COO
(ours_without_PO)” represents that the algorithm proposed in this paper does not use
PO constraints, “COO (ours_without_UWB)” represents that the algorithm proposed
in this paper does not use UWB measurement, “COO (ours_without_MAG)” repre-
sents that the algorithm proposed in this paper without Magnetic Assisted, and “COO
(ours_without_UWB_AA)” represents that the algorithm proposed in this paper does not
use the chi-squared test based UWB adaptive adjustment (UWB_AA) strategy. Figure 9
shows a comparison of the running times of different algorithms to evaluate the operat-
ing efficiency. It can be seen that our algorithm can maintain high operating efficiency
thanks to its lightweight architecture and filter-based advantages. Moreover, the 3588 board
(16 GB RAM) on our device runs the algorithm with a memory usage of ≤10% and a CPU
usage of ≤30% to meet real-time demands. The system is powered by an independent
12 V/6000 mAh lithium battery, supporting continuous operation for ≥1 h. To sum up,
compared with the open source SOTA VIO positioning method and multi-UAV collabora-
tive positioning method, the algorithm proposed in this paper shows excellent positioning
performance and computational efficiency.
Figure 9. Runtime comparison of different algorithms in real-world experiments, in milliseconds.
Table 8. RMSE of the position in real-world experiments, in meters.
Method
UAV1
UAV2
UAV3
Avg.
VINS-Mono
4.01
4.29
4.03
4.11
OpenVINS
3.97
4.06
3.41
3.81
SuperVINS
3.85
3.87
3.57
3.76
COO_VIR
3.04
3.49
2.57
3.03
COVINS-G
3.22
3.57
2.64
3.14
COO (ours_without_PO)
2.06
2.44
2.23
2.24
COO (ours_without_UWB)
2.43
2.95
2.38
2.59
COO (ours_without_MAG)
1.72
2.33
2.26
2.10
COO (ours_without_UWB_AA)
1.98
2.67
2.54
2.40
COO (ours)
1.53
2.08
1.97
1.86
Furthermore, in real-world experiments, the test scenario for unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) is a relatively flat urban square. In contrast, the scenario in simulation experiments
is a complex terrain environment that includes undulating buildings, grasslands, rivers and
other elements, with a larger motion scale. Consequently, the accuracy of the results obtained
from real-world experiments is higher than that of the results from simulation experiments.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.27]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
27 of 30
Additionally, we conducted a statistical analysis of the UWB data processing results
in the real-world experiment. Using the same abnormality criterion (error > 1 m), the
statistical results are shown in Table 9.
Table 9. Statistical analysis of UWB anomaly detection performance in real-world experiment.
Statistic Index
UAV1
UAV2
UAV3
Average
Anomaly ratio in raw UWB data
12.2%
8.5%
6.8%
9.2%
Correctly identified anomaly ratio
11.0%
7.5%
6.2%
8.2%
Anomaly detection rate
90.2%
88.2%
91.2%
89.9%
Table 9 shows the UWB anomaly detection performance for each UAV and the av-
erage performance in the real-world experiment. On average, our chi-squared detection
method achieves a high anomaly detection rate of 89.9% across all UAVs. This result
further confirms the effectiveness of our chi-squared detection method in real-world sce-
narios, demonstrating its robustness and practical applicability even when different UAVs
experience varying UWB measurement conditions.
5. Conclusions
This paper addresses the challenge of degraded navigation and positioning accuracy
in GNSS-challenged environments for unmanned platforms, where visual environmental
features are sparse and GNSS communication is constrained. We propose a distributed
anchor-free visual-inertial-UWB-Magnetic multi-UAV cooperative localization system. In
this system, UWB measurements between UAVs are utilized to estimate inter-drone dis-
tances without relying on pre-deployed UWB anchors. A sliding window EKF framework
is adopted to fuse multi-modal observations, enhancing the algorithm’s lightweight design
and real-time performance. To further improve accuracy, a PO visual observation model
is introduced, which strengthens the system’s adaptability to challenging visual environ-
ments with limited features. Additionally, a novel MDS (Multidimensional Scaling)-MAP
initialization method fuses ranging, IMU, and geomagnetic data to solve the non-convex
optimization problem in ranging-aided SLAM, ensuring fast and accurate swarm absolute
pose initialization. The improvement mechanism of absolute positioning accuracy in coop-
erative positioning without anchor points is analyzed, multiple keyframes are integrated
into the sliding window, ensuring robustness and precision. Different from the current
Vision-Inertial-UWB Cooperative Localization System based on the VIO system, we adopt
a tightly-coupled Cooperative Localization System based on IMU, which can effectively
deal with vision loss.
Extensive simulation and real-world experiments demonstrate that the proposed
method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art localization approaches in GNSS-denied
scenarios. In particular, our system achieved an average positioning accuracy of 5.74 m
in an outdoor 50-m flight simulation experiment and 1.86 m in the actual experiment,
which is a significant improvement over existing methods. Importantly, our method can
effectively deal with situations of vision loss, maintaining an accuracy of 6.91 m even
when other approaches fail completely. Notably, our chi-squared test-based UWB adaptive
adjustment (UWB_AA) strategy effectively filters abnormal UWB measurements, achieving
over 88% anomaly detection rate in both simulation and real-world experiments. Ablation
experiments confirm it improves accuracy in UWB abnormality scenarios, enhancing the
system’s robustness and accuracy.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.28]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
28 of 30
The successful deployment of our system on small-scale UAV platforms validates its
practicality and applicability in real-world lightweight drone systems.
In future research work, we will further explore the application of our system in
challenging environments such as large-scale deployments and day-night transitions to
obtain a more comprehensive and powerful drone cluster positioning system.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: X.L. and J.M.; methodology: X.L. and X.D.; software: X.L.
and S.Y.; validation: X.L., Y.L. and L.Z.; formal analysis: X.L. and X.H.; investigation: X.L. and W.W.;
resources: J.M.; data curation: X.L.; writing—original draft preparation: X.L.; writing—review and
editing: J.M. and X.D.; visualization: X.L.; supervision: J.M.; project administration: J.M.; funding
acquisition: J.M. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant
numbers: 62103430, 62103427, 62073331) and Major Project of Natural Science Foundation of Hunan
Province (No.2021JC0004).
Data Availability Statement: The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request. The code that supports the findings of this study is
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1.
Arafat, M.Y.; Alam, M.M.; Moh, S. Vision-Based Navigation Techniques for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: Review and Challenges.
Drones 2023, 7, 89. [CrossRef]
2.
Gaigalas, J.; Perkauskas, L.; Gricius, H.; Kanapickas, T.; Krišˇci¯unas, A. A Framework for Autonomous UAV Navigation Based on
Monocular Depth Estimation. Drones 2025, 9, 236. [CrossRef]
3.
Munguia, R.; Trujillo, J.-C.; Grau, A. UAV Navigation Using EKF-MonoSLAM Aided by Range-to-Base Measurements. Drones
2025, 9, 570. [CrossRef]
4.
Gupta, A.; Fernando, X. Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) and Data Fusion in Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: Recent
Advances and Challenges. Drones 2022, 6, 85. [CrossRef]
5.
Zhou, J.; Gu, G.; Chen, X. Distributed Kalman filtering over wireless sensor networks in the presence of data packet drops. IEEE
Trans. Automat. Control 2018, 64, 1603–1610. [CrossRef]
6.
Tang, J.; Duan, H.; Lao, S. Swarm intelligence algorithms for multiple unmanned aerial vehicles collaboration: A comprehensive
review. Artif. Intell. Rev. 2023, 56, 4295–4327. [CrossRef]
7.
Schmuck, P.; Ziegler, T.; Karrer, M.; Perraudin, J.; Chli, M. COVINS: Visual-Inertial SLAM for Centralized Collaboration. In
Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR 2021), Bari, Italy, 4–8 October
2021.
8.
Xu, H.; Liu, P.; Chen, X.; Shen, S. D2SLAM: Decentralized and Distributed Collaborative Visual-Inertial SLAM System for Aerial
Swarm. IEEE Trans. Robot. 2024, 40, 3445–3464. [CrossRef]
9.
Liu, C.; Zhao, J.; Sun, N. A Review of Collaborative Air-Ground Robots Research. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2022, 106, 60. [CrossRef]
10.
Romanelli, F.; Martinelli, F.; Mattogno, S. Resilient Simultaneous Localization and Mapping Fusing Ultra Wide Band Range
Measurements and Visual Odometry. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2023, 109, 64. [CrossRef]
11.
Patel, M.; Karrer, M.; Bänninger, P.; Chli, M. COVINS-G: A Generic Back-end for Collaborative Visual-Inertial SLAM. In
Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), London, UK, 29 May–2 June 2003;
IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA; pp. 2076–2082. [CrossRef]
12.
Cao, Y.; Beltrame, G. VIR-SLAM: Visual, inertial, and ranging SLAM for single and multi-robot systems. Auton. Robot. 2021, 45,
905–917. [CrossRef]
13.
Du, X.; Zhang, L.; Ji, C.; Luo, X.; Wang, M.; Wu, W.; Mao, J. SPVIO: Pose-Only Visual Inertial Odometry With State Transformation
and Visual-Deprived Correction. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 2025, 12, 49644–49663. [CrossRef]
14.
Wang, L.; Tang, H.; Zhang, T.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Niu, X. PO-KF: A Pose-Only Representation-based Kalman Filter for Visual
Inertial Odometry. IEEE Internet Things J. 2025, 12, 14856–14875. [CrossRef]
15.
Walter, V.; Staub, N.; Franchi, A.; Saska, M. UVDAR System for Visual Relative Localization with Application to Leader-Follower
Formations of Multirotor UAVs. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2019, 4, 2637–2644. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.29]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
29 of 30
16.
Ge, R.; Lee, M.; Radhakrishnan, V.; Zhou, Y.; Li, G.; Loianno, G. Vision-based Relative Detection and Tracking for Teams of Micro
Aerial Vehicles. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Kyoto,
Japan, 23–27 October 2022.
17.
Schilling, F.; Schiano, F.; Floreano, D. Vision-Based Drone Flocking in Outdoor Environments. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2021, 6,
2954–2961. [CrossRef]
18.
Vrba, M.; Saska, M. Marker-Less Micro Aerial Vehicle Detection and Localization Using Convolutional Neural Networks. IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett. 2020, 5, 2459–2466. [CrossRef]
19.
Dubois, R.; Eudes, A.; Frémont, V. Sharing visual-inertial data for collaborative decentralized simultaneous localization and
mapping. Robot. Auton. Syst. 2022, 148, 103933. [CrossRef]
20.
Gross, J.; De Petrillo, M.; Beard, J.; Nichols, H.; Swiger, T.; Watson, R.; Kirk, C.; Kilic, C.; Hikes, J.; Upton, E.; et al. Field-Testing
of a UAV-UGV Team for GNSS-Denied Localization in Subterranean Environments. In Proceedings of the 32nd International
Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of Localization (ION GNSS+), Miami, FL, USA, 16–20 September 2019;
pp. 2112–2124.
21.
Zhu, F.; Ren, Y.; Kong, F.; Wu, H.; Liang, S.; Chen, N.; Xu, W.; Zhang, F. Swarm-LIO: Decentralized Swarm LiDAR inertial
Odometry. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Vienna, Austria, 1–5 June
2023; pp. 3254–3260.
22.
Pritzl, V.; Vrba, M.; Štˇepán, P.; Saska, M. Fusion of Visual-Inertial Odometry with LiDAR Relative Localization for Cooperative
Guidance of a Micro-Scale Aerial Vehicle. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2306.17544.
23.
Nguyen, T.M.; Cao, M.; Yuan, S.; Lyu, Y.; Nguyen, T.H.; Xie, L. VIRAL-Fusion: A Visual-Inertial-Ranging Lidar Sensor Fusion
Approach. IEEE Trans. Robot. 2022, 38, 958–977. [CrossRef]
24.
Delama, G.; Shamsfakhr, F.; Weiss, S.; Fontanelli, D.; Fomasier, A. UVIO: An UWB-Aided Visual-Inertial Odometry Framework
with Bias-Compensated Anchors Initialization. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), Detroit, MI, USA, 1–5 October 2023.
25.
Kao, P.-Y.; Chang, H.-J.; Tseng, K.-W.; Chen, T.; Luo, H.-L.; Hung, Y.-P. VIUNet: Deep Visual–Inertial–UWB Fusion for Indoor
UAV Localization. IEEE Access 2023, 11, 61525–61534. [CrossRef]
26.
Nguyen, T.H.; Nguyen, T.M.; Xie, L. Flexible and Resource-Efficient Multi-Robot Collaborative Visual-Inertial-Range Localization.
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2022, 7, 928–935. [CrossRef]
27.
Ziegler, T.; Karrer, M.; Schmuck, P.; Chli, M. Distributed Formation Estimation via Pairwise Distance Measurements. IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett. 2021, 6, 3017–3024. [CrossRef]
28.
Xu, H.; Wang, L.; Zhang, Y.; Qiu, K.; Shen, S. Decentralized Visual-Inertial-UWB Fusion for Relative State Estimation of Aerial
Swarm. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Paris, France, 31 May–31
August 2020.
29.
Queralta, J.P.; Li, Q.; Schiano, F.; Westerlund, T. VIO-UWB-Based Collaborative Localization and Dense Scene Reconstruc-
tion within Heterogeneous Multi-Robot Systems. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Robotics and
Mechatronics (ICARM), Guilin, China, 9–11 July 2022.
30.
Spasojevic, I.; Liu, X.; Ribeiro, A.; Pappas, G.J.; Kumar, V. Active Collaborative Localization in Heterogeneous Robot Teams. In
Proceedings of the Robotics: Science and Systems, Daegu, Republic of Korea, 10–14 July 2023.
31.
Li, J.; Yang, G.; Cai, Q.; Niu, H.; Li, J. Cooperative localization for UAVs in GNSS-denied area based on optimized belief
propagation. Measurement 2022, 192, 110797. [CrossRef]
32.
Lin, H.Y.; Zhan, J.R. GNSS-denied UAV indoor localization with UWB incorporated visual inertial odometry. Measurement 2023,
206, 112256. [CrossRef]
33.
Xiong, C.; Lu, W.; Xiong, H.; Ding, H.; He, Q.; Zhao, D.; Wan, J.; Xing, F.; You, Z. Onboard cooperative relative positioning system
for Micro-UAV swarm based on UWB/Vision/INS fusion through distributed graph optimization. Measurement 2024, 234, 114897.
[CrossRef]
34.
Bautista, N.; Gutierrez, H.; Inness, J.; Rakoczy, J. Precision Landing of a Quadcopter Drone by Smartphone Video Guidance
Sensor in a GPS-Denied Environment. Sensors 2023, 23, 1934. [CrossRef]
35.
Silva Cotta, J.L.; Agar, D.; Bertaska, I.R.; Inness, J.P.; Gutierrez, H. Latency Reduction and Packet Synchronization in Low-Resource
Devices Connected by DDS Networks in Autonomous UAVs. Sensors 2023, 23, 9269. [CrossRef]
36.
Silva Cotta, J.L.; Gutierrez, H.; Bertaska, I.R.; Inness, J.P.; Rakoczy, J. High-Altitude Precision Landing by Smartphone Video
Guidance Sensor and Sensor Fusion. Drones 2024, 8, 37. [CrossRef]
37.
Geneva, P.; Eckenhoff, K.; Lee, W.; Yang, Y.; Huang, G. OpenVINS: A Research Platform for Visual-Inertial Estimation. In
Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Paris, France, 31 May–31 August 2020.
38.
Cai, Q.; Wu, Y.; Zhang, L.; Zhang, P. Equivalent constraints for two-view geometry: Pose solution/pure rotation identification
and 3d reconstruction. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 2019, 127, 163–180. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
[p.30]
Drones 2026, 10, 49
30 of 30
39.
Cai, Q.; Zhang, L.; Wu, Y.; Yu, W.; Hu, D. A pose-only solution to visual reconstruction and localization. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 2023, 45, 73–86. [CrossRef]
40.
Qin, T.; Li, P.; Shen, S. VINS-Mono: A Robust and Versatile Monocular Visual-Inertial State Estimator. IEEE Trans. Robot. 2018, 34,
1004–1020. [CrossRef]
41.
Luo, H.; Liu, Y.; Guo, C.; Li, Z.; Song, W. SuperVINS: A Real-Time Visual-Inertial SLAM Framework for Challenging Imaging
Conditions. IEEE Sens. J. 2025, 25, 26042–26050. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010049
=== END ===
