warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0294.pdf
sha256: 6601DEA03A4CA2561C0C6C07559D78CB039611D385DFEC8018CCC6182ADE147F
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 8
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
A Novel Approach to Computationally Lighter 
GNSS-Denied UAV Navigation Using Monocular 
Camera 
Joyraj Bhowmick* 
Delhi Technological University 
New Delhi, India 
joyrajbhowmick_2k17ee100@dtu
.ac.in
Anurag Singh* 
Delhi Technological University 
New Delhi, India 
anuragsingh_2k17ec32@dtu.ac.in 
Harshit Gupta*  
Delhi Technological University 
New Delhi, India 
harshitgupta_2k19co151@dtu.ac.i
n 
Raghava Nallanthighal**  
Delhi Technological University 
New Delhi, India 
nsraghava@dtu.ac.in
Abstract—A good receptivity of GNSS signals during 
autonomous navigation is of prime importance. Due to this, 
navigation becomes close to impossible with places having low 
receptivity or GNSS-denied zones. In this paper, a navigational 
system is presented for a multi-rotor UAV in a GNSS-denied 
environment. The global positioning problem is solved by taking 
a local reference frame and estimating the UAV’s position and 
velocity w.r.t it, using an onboard monocular camera and 
barometer. The navigational problem is solved by designing a 
required velocity function and tuning the system’s response to 
this input by a PID controller. The results of both simulations 
and actual flight tests show the effectiveness and reliability of the 
presented work, which enables a UAV to perform full automated 
missions from takeoff, waypoint navigation and landing, in 
complete absence of any GNSS signals. 
Keywords—GNSS-denied 
outdoor 
navigation, 
Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicles, Visual Odometry 
NOMENCLATURE 
UAV 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
fps 
Frames Per Second 
GNSS 
Global Navigation Satellite System 
NED 
North East Down 
𝑓𝑤, 𝑓ℎ
Image frame width (in pixels) and height (in 
pixels) 
𝑓𝑜𝑣𝑤, 𝑓𝑜𝑣ℎ
Horizontal and vertical field of view of camera 
(in degrees) 
(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖)
Row and column of the of the 𝑖𝑡ℎ detected
feature in the image frame 
𝑛 
Frame number 
𝑑𝑛
Displacement vector of the UAV in pixels 
𝐷𝑛
Displacement vector of the UAV in meter w.r.t 
the inertial frame 
𝑣′
Unfiltered velocity estimates  
𝑣 
Filtered velocity estimates 
𝑘 
Low-pass filter constant 
𝑣𝑟
Required velocity to towards destination 
𝐾𝑝, 𝐾𝑖, 𝐾𝑑
Proportional, integral and derivative constants of 
PID 
𝑒𝑣
Difference between required velocity and current 
velocity 
𝑎𝑐𝑐 
Acceleration vector required to reduce the 
velocity difference 
I.
INTRODUCTION
UAVs are actively being developed and used for a wide 
range of civilian and military applications ranging from aerial 
photography, precision farming, land surveying, surveillance, 
reconnaissance, search and rescue operations, etc. [1]. Due to 
active research in UAVs and availability of reliable platforms, 
they are often used in HADR (Humanitarian Assistance and 
Disaster Relief) scenarios. They are required to navigate to a 
location, assess the situation, search for survivors, send back 
required data and finally return back to base. To achieve this, 
almost all UAVs rely on a combination of multiple GNSS 
systems for accurate positioning and hence navigation. 
The loss of GNSS signals during a mission can occur due 
to multiple reasons: navigation in hilly terrain, presence of 
jammers, low signal patches, faulty sensors, etc. This can be 
devastating for the UAV and the mission and often leads to 
abortion of a critical mission. Various solutions have been 
proposed to counter this, but they majorly focus on indoor 
localization and navigation. In [2], a comparative study of 
different indoor navigation techniques is done. The author 
used reflective markers and installed multiple cameras in the 
lab to accurately locate the UAV. Another approach for 
indoor localization of UAVs is taken up by installing fiducial 
markers at various locations all over the building [3]. Since, 
both these methods require preparing the surrounding 
environment prior to flying, these cannot be used for outdoor 
navigation. 
Various studies for outdoor navigation are also available 
as well, using a wide variety of approaches and sensors such 
as, lidars, optical flow sensors, IMUs, monocular vision 
cameras, stereo vision cameras, UWB radio modules, etc. In 
[4], the authors propose a method of geolocation by 
registering the aerial images taken during flight to the Google 
Satellite images of that location. This method is not readily 
deployable as the Google Satellite images are a prerequisite to 
flying at any new place. Moreover, this leads to errors if the 
Google Satellite images are not updated. 
*These authors contributed equally.
**Corresponding author (phone: +91 97117 24842). 
114
2021 International Conference on Automation, Robotics and Applications
978-0-7381-4290-6/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
2021 7th International Conference on Automation, Robotics and Applications (ICARA) | 978-1-6654-0469-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICARA51699.2021.9376502
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
An approach using a stereo vision camera, an on-board 
computer running a ROS architecture is proposed for a rover 
[5]. However, the weight and power constraints for a UAV is 
much more stringent, hence the same approach cannot be used 
for a UAV. The solution proposed in [6] uses the PX4Flow 
optical flow sensor (directly compatible with ArduCopter) 
along with IMUs and barometer. Although the optical flow 
sensor used provides a low-cost solution to motion tracking 
and perception, they are not suitable for low feature rich areas 
and high-flying altitudes (>50m). 
The authors in [7] used a monocular camera and IMUs to 
present a method of UAV localization through a landmark and 
developed a navigation solution that works till the landmark is 
in the FOV of the camera. This was further improved in [8] 
where a better navigational solution was presented where the 
UAV does not need any landmark but stores multiple features 
present on the ground during navigation. A different approach 
was presented for the same UAV and sensors in [9] where the 
flight performance was further improved. However, the 
approaches were computationally intensive, the authors in [8] 
used two flight computers and the authors in [9] used a flight 
computer with Intel i7 processor. Moreover, the flying altitude 
was <50m. 
A solution for GNSS denied navigation with transition 
from outdoor to indoor environments was presented in [10]. 
The authors used a stereo vision camera and a 2D 360 lidar 
and achieved navigational speeds up to 18m/s. A similar 
approach was presented in [11], using a 2D 360 lidar capable 
of navigation in clustered outdoor environments. However, 
these 
solutions 
are 
feasible 
if 
the 
vehicle 
detects 
features/objects in its lateral plane (such as trees, walls, doors, 
etc.) while navigating, hence won’t be applicable to UAV 
flying at higher altitudes (>50m). 
It is evident that outdoor GNSS denied navigation 
solutions have been developed but they are not applicable at 
altitudes >50m. Also, most of these use an additional payload 
such as a particular optical flow sensor, lidar, stereo vision 
camera, etc. The aim of this paper to present a novel, 
computationally lighter approach to outdoor GNSS denied 
navigation applicable at altitudes >50m using only the most 
common and standard payload: barometer, flight computer 
and a monocular camera. The proposed navigational system 
comprises two major components: 
 Position and Velocity Estimator: The image processing 
algorithm detects and tracks features on ground and 
processes them to calculate relative position and 
velocity of the UAV w.r.t ground. 
 Navigational Controller: The navigational controller 
generates the trajectory and optimal control inputs for 
roll, pitch and thrust to follow the generated trajectory. 
The solution outlined in this paper can be used as a backup 
navigational controller which remains active till the time the 
UAV flies through a GNSS dead zone, or can be used as a 
complete navigational controller for a UAV from takeoff to 
landing in a GNSS denied environment. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
provides some key concepts and notations used throughout the 
paper. Section III derives the position and velocity estimates. 
Section IV presents the navigational controller with required 
control inputs. Section V lists the results of tests conducted in 
simulations as well as actual flight tests, giving an optimum 
operating point. Section VI provides a brief conclusion and 
scope of future work.  
II. PRELIMINARIES 
A. Reference Frames 
Two reference frames are used in this paper: 
 Inertial Frame: The origin and axes in this frame are 
fixed at a point in the ground (earth) and do not change 
w.r.t time. The conventional NED frame is used as 
inertial frame. The orientation of axes in this frame are: 
𝑥-axis—positive towards north. 
𝑦-axis—positive towards east. 
𝑧-axis—positive downwards (towards gravity). 
The takeoff point of the UAV is taken as the origin for 
the inertial frame. 
 Body Frame: The origin and axes in this frame are 
fixed at a point on the UAV and thus change w.r.t time. 
In the body frame the orientation of the axes are: 
𝑥-axis—positive towards the heading of UAV (in 
UAV plane). 
𝑦-axis—positive towards 90 degree clockwise from the 
heading (in UAV plane) 
𝑧
-axis—positive 
towards 
the 
𝑥⃗×𝑦⃗⃗
|𝑥⃗×𝑦⃗⃗|
 direction, 
perpendicular to UAV plane. 
where, UAV plane is parallel to the plane of the 
Autopilot. 
B. UAV Dynamics 
The state of the UAV at any point of time is defined by 6 
state variables: 
                                    [𝑥
𝑦
𝑧
ϕ
θ
ψ]𝑇                           (1) 
where (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) represents the position of the UAV w.r.t the 
inertial frame and (ϕ, θ, ψ) represents the attitude of the UAV. 
ϕ: Roll angle (about 𝑥-axis in body frame) 
θ: Pitch angle (about 𝑦-axis in body frame) 
ψ: Yaw angle (about 𝑧-axis in body frame) 
The rotation matrix 𝑅𝑀 is used to convert vectors from 
body frame to inertial frame [12]. 
      𝑅𝑀= [
𝐶ψ𝐶θ
𝐶ψ𝑆θ𝑆ϕ— 𝑆ψ𝐶ϕ
𝐶ψ𝑆θ𝐶ϕ + 𝑆ψ𝑆ϕ
𝑆ψ𝐶θ
𝑆ψ𝑆θ𝑆ϕ + 𝐶ψ𝐶ϕ
𝑆ψ𝑆θ𝐶ϕ— 𝐶ψ𝑆ϕ
— 𝑆θ
𝐶θ𝑆ϕ
𝐶θ𝐶ϕ
]     (2) 
here 𝑆ϕ is sin ϕ, 𝐶ϕ is cos ϕ, and so on. 
For our system, the use of 3-axis gimbal helps the camera 
plane always lie parallel to the inertial 𝑥-𝑦 plane. We have 
also maintained ψ = 0, i.e., heading always pointing towards 
north during the entire flight. This provides a number of 
advantages: 
115
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
 Any trajectory can still be followed by a multirotor 
without changing its yaw angle. 
 The constant yaw angle during flight excludes a lot of 
computational complexities. 
 The rotation matrix formed is highly simplified and the 
camera being parallel to the inertial 𝑥-𝑦 plane allows 
the displacements calculated through the camera to be 
directly used as displacements in inertial frame.  
Thus, for ψ = 0, the rotation matrix is reduced to: 
                             𝑅𝑀= [
𝐶θ
𝑆θ𝑆ϕ
𝑆θ𝐶ϕ
0
𝐶ϕ
— 𝑆ϕ
— 𝑆θ
𝐶θ𝑆ϕ
𝐶θ𝐶ϕ
]                        (3) 
The only force acting in the UAV’s frame (body frame) 
neglecting the drag due to the translational motion, is the 
upward force due to propulsion. Therefore, the force acting in 
the body frame is 𝐹𝐵. To convert this force and the roll pitch 
angles to the inertial frame of reference [13], the following 
equation is used: 
                           [
𝑥̈
𝑦̈
𝑧̈
] = 1
𝑚([
0
0
𝑚𝑔
] + 𝑅𝑀[
0
0
— 𝐹𝐵
])                     (4) 
By simplifying the above equations, the relationship between 
linear accelerations of the UAV in the inertial frame and the 
roll angle, pitch angle and thrust is obtained: 
                           [
𝑥̈
𝑦̈
𝑧̈
] = 1
𝑚([
— 𝐹𝐵𝑆θ𝐶ϕ
𝐹𝐵𝑆ϕ
— 𝐹𝐵𝐶θ𝐶ϕ + 𝑚𝑔
])                     (5) 
III. ESTIMATION 
A. Feature Detection and Tracking 
The monocular camera used has been first calibrated to 
undistort the captured images. The camera is mounted on a 3-
axis gimbal which counters the UAVs attitude and keeps the 
camera pointing downwards at all times during the flight. The 
gimbal is attached to the UAV through vibration isolation 
balls, reducing high-frequency vibrations in images. Images 
of the ground is continuously captured at a specified frame 
rate. Features are regions at an image with a large variation in 
intensity in all directions. Shi-Tomasi [14] and SURF [15] are 
found to be better feature detection algorithms [16]. To find 
the most suitable one for our case, these two algorithms were 
tested on a video of resolution 640 × 480 having 4857 frames 
captured by a UAV moving in a straight line at a speed of 
5m/s and altitude 100m. The displacement of these features 
was tracked using the Lucas-Kanade optical flow algorithm as 
it can be easily applied to a subset of points in the input image 
combined with features improving efficiency (discussed 
further in [17]). It directly recovers motion at some required 
pixels from spatio-temporal image brightness variations in the 
image. It works under certain implicit assumptions: 
 The displacement of the features in two consecutive 
images must not be significantly large. 
 The images must depict texture objects, exhibiting 
varying brightness levels, changing smoothly.  
The graphs of the estimated trajectory generated is plotted 
against actual trajectory in Fig. 1. The processing time for 
both the algorithms is shown in Table I. 
The Shi-Tomasi corner detection algorithm was selected 
due to lower processing time and better accuracy which will 
suite high speed operations. 
The UAV’s motion is estimated by calculating the 
displacement vector of the distinct features between every two 
consecutive frames captured by the camera. Approximately 
50-60 features are tracked on each frame. The features near 
the edges of the frame tend to accumulate at the same position 
for successive frames due to aperture problem, giving 
erroneous results. Thus, features within a pixel width of 𝑏 
from the edges of the image frame are discarded in the 
displacement calculation. The pixel width 𝑏 is taken to be 20 
pixels in our case. This significantly reduces errors without 
compromising on number of features. If a particular feature 
goes out of the image frame, it is neglected and estimation is 
continued with the rest of the features. If the number of 
features falls below 30, features are recomputed using the 
feature detection algorithm. 
B. Position and Velocity Estimates 
The position vector 𝑃, is the position of the UAV with 
respect to the inertial frame. 
                                        𝑃= [𝑥
𝑦
𝑧]𝑇                                    (6) 
The point of takeoff (𝑃0) is taken as the home location of 
the UAV, with 
                                        𝑃0 = [0
0
0]𝑇                                   (7) 
Feature tracking is used to calculate the displacement 
along the 𝑥 and 𝑦 axes. The displacement along the 𝑧-axis or 
altitude is obtained from the readings of the barometer of the 
autopilot. 
TABLE I. PROCESSING TIME COMPARISON 
Algorithm 
Time (in seconds) 
Shi-Tomasi 
40.11 
SURF 
45.47 
 
Fig. 1. Plot of actual trajectory (red) and estimated trajectory for Shi-Tomasi 
(green) and SURF (blue) 
 
116
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
𝑓𝑛 is the matrix consisting of positions of features (in 
pixels) detected in the 𝑛𝑡ℎ frame and 𝑚 is the total number of 
features detected in that frame, (𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖) is the position of the 
𝑖𝑡ℎ feature in that frame. 𝐹𝑛 is the average of the positions of 
features in that frame. 
                                          𝑓𝑛= [
𝑟1
𝑐1
𝑟2
⋮
𝑐2
⋮
𝑟𝑚
𝑐𝑚
]                                     (8) 
                                𝐹𝑛= [∑
𝑟𝑖
𝑚
𝑖=1
𝑚
∑
𝑐𝑖
𝑚
𝑖=1
𝑚
]                               (9) 
The average position of features in the 𝑛𝑡ℎ frame is 
compared with their average position in the (𝑛— 1)𝑡ℎ frame, 
to estimate the displacement along the 𝑥 and 𝑦 axes. The 
average position of features is also affected by change in 
altitude of the UAV, as with increase in altitude features tend 
to aggregate and with decrease in altitude features tend to 
disperse. Hence, the projection of the average position of 
features in the previous frame is taken on the current altitude 
using the formula: 
                𝐹𝑛—1
′
= 𝑧𝑛—1
𝑧𝑛
𝐹𝑛—1 + (𝑧𝑛—1
𝑧𝑛
— 1) [𝑓ℎ
2
𝑓𝑤
2 ]       (10) 
The difference between the average of current features and 
projection of the average of previous features is then 
calculated: 
                                        𝑑𝑛= 𝐹𝑛— 𝐹𝑛−1
′
                                   (11) 
The 𝑑𝑛 vector gives displacement along the 𝑥 and 𝑦 axes 
in pixels. To convert it into displacement w.r.t the ground, the 
following equations are used: 
                       𝐷= 2𝑧𝑛𝑑𝑛
[
 
 
 
 
 tan 𝑓𝑜𝑣ℎ
2
𝑓ℎ
0
0
tan 𝑓𝑜𝑣𝑤
2
𝑓𝑤
]
 
 
 
 
 
                 (12) 
                                           𝐷= [𝐷𝑥
𝐷𝑦]                                  (13) 
The velocity vector is obtained by dividing the calculated 
displacement vector 𝐷 with the time interval Δ𝑡. 
                                 𝑣′ = [𝐷𝑥
Δ𝑡
𝐷𝑦
Δ𝑡
𝑧𝑛— 𝑧𝑛—1
Δ𝑡
]
𝑇
                 (14) 
The displacement vectors are added over time to calculate 
the total displacement of the UAV, providing its current 
position 𝑃𝑐 w.r.t the takeoff point 𝑃0: 
                    𝑃𝑐= [∑𝐷𝑥
∑𝐷𝑦
∑[𝑧𝑛— 𝑧𝑛—1]]
𝑇
        (15) 
The velocity estimates given by the image processing 
algorithm is highly oscillatory in nature. It is fed to a low-pass 
filter which smoothens the velocity output. The constant 𝑘 of 
the low-pass filter is tuned manually by examining the 
smoothness of the output curve and time delay. 
                                          𝛼=
∆𝑡
𝑘+ ∆𝑡                                        (16) 
                                      𝑣= 𝛼𝑣′ + (1— 𝛼)𝑣𝑛—1                      (17) 
Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 plots the raw unfiltered velocity estimate 
and the low-pass filtered velocity in 𝑥 and 𝑦 axes respectively. 
IV. NAVIGATIONAL CONTROLLER 
The destination position is given as a setpoint vector (𝑃𝑠) 
from the origin of the inertial frame: 
                                      𝑃𝑠= [𝑥𝑠
𝑦𝑠
𝑧𝑠]𝑇                              (18) 
To obtain the desired velocity for the UAV to reach the 
destination, a positional error term is calculated using: 
                                              𝑒= 𝑃𝑠— 𝑃𝑐                                     (19) 
The desired velocity is given by: 
                                             𝑣𝑟⃗⃗⃗⃗=
𝑣𝑚𝑟2
𝑎2+𝑟2 𝑢⃗⃗                                    (20)  
                                                  𝑟= |𝑒|                                         (21) 
                                                   𝑢⃗⃗= 𝑒
𝑟                                          (22) 
where, 
𝑣𝑚—upper bound to the UAV’s velocity 
𝑎—constant determining the smoothness of the velocity curve 
(in meters) 
𝑟— Magnitude of positional error 
𝑢⃗⃗—unit vector pointing in the direction of destination 
The magnitude of 𝑣𝑟𝑥⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ vs positional error in 𝑥-axis is 
plotted in Fig. 4 with 𝑣𝑚= 5𝑚/𝑠 and 𝑎= 5𝑚. To follow the 
desired velocity, a velocity error term is calculated and fed 
 
Fig. 2. Plot of raw (blue) and filtered (red) current velocity along x-axis 
 
Fig. 3. Plot of raw (blue) and filtered (red) current velocity along y-axis 
117
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
 
Fig. 4. Plot of magnitude of required velocity along x-axis (𝑣𝑟𝑥) vs positional error (𝑒) along x-axis
into a PID controller. The velocity error term is given by: 
                                            𝑒𝑣= 𝑣𝑟— 𝑣                                       (23) 
The PID controller outputs the optimum control input in 
the form of linear accelerations w.r.t the inertial frame, in 𝑥, 𝑦 
and 𝑧 directions: 
                     𝑎𝑐𝑐= 𝐾𝑝𝑒𝑣+ 𝐾𝑑
1
∆𝑡𝑒𝑣+ 𝐾𝑖∑𝑒𝑣                   (24) 
                                   𝑎𝑐𝑐= [𝑎𝑥
𝑎𝑦
𝑎𝑧]                              (25) 
The obtained linear acceleration values are converted to 
roll angle, pitch angle and thrust using the following equations: 
                                         θ = tan−1
𝑎𝑥
𝑎𝑧— 𝑔                               (26) 
                                    ϕ = tan−1 (𝑎𝑦
𝑎𝑥
sin θ)                             (27) 
                                         𝐹𝐵= 𝑚(𝑔— 𝑎𝑧)
𝐶θ𝐶ϕ
                                (28) 
The roll, pitch and thrust values are fed as to the autopilot 
which follows the given attitude commands. 
During takeoff and return to home, the desired position is 
set as [0
0
𝑧]𝑇 where 𝑧 is the hovering altitude after takeoff 
or before landing. For landing, the altitude is decreased at this 
position until the altitude readings from the barometer stops 
changing. 
The time required by our algorithm to detect GNSS signal 
loss is 1 second. To efficiently switch between GNSS and 
Non-GNSS navigation, the GNSS location and velocity 
estimates of the last 5 seconds of GNSS aided flight are stored 
and the displacement from the takeoff point is continuously 
tracked. This data is used to switch to Non-GNSS navigation 
when GNSS signals are weak or lost. A switch is made if the 
number of satellites <6 or if a GNSS glitch occurs. 
V. SIMULATION AND FLIGHT RESULTS  
A. System Overview 
The hardware setup is mentioned in Table II. The gimbal is 
controlled by the autopilot and is commanded to always point 
the camera downward facing. The image processing and 
navigational control algorithms are running on the onboard 
computer. The onboard computer is interfaced to the camera 
using a USB cable and to the autopilot using the serial 
interface. The system architecture is depicted in Fig. 5.  
Several experiments were conducted at varying camera 
resolutions and terrain types. The complete software (position 
and velocity estimation and navigational controller) runs at 
~20fps and ~16fps at resolutions of  640 × 480 and 1280 ×
720 respectively. The navigational controller gave promising 
results with update rates of the estimates as low as ~6fps. The 
proposed system has been tested for navigational speeds up to 
5m/s and for altitudes up to 70m above the ground level. 
B. Optical Flow Algorithm 
Raw videos at a resolution of 640 × 480 were captured by 
our system at varying altitudes and varying speeds up to 5m/s. 
The positional estimation algorithm was first tested on these 
videos. The estimated co-ordinates of the followed trajectory 
were compared with the actual GPS co-ordinates. The obtained 
results were analysed and the error was found to be acceptable 
at altitudes from 5m to 70m with a frame rate of ~15fps. 
Higher resolution resulted in lower error on altitudes above 
TABLE II. 
Airframe 
Tarot 650mm quadcopter 
Autopilot Board 
Pixhawk 2.1 Cube 
Autopilot Firmware 
ArduPilot’s ArduCopter 
Camera 
GitUp Git2P (RGB, monocular, diagonal 
FOV: 90°) 
Gimbal 
Tarot T4-3D (3-axis) 
Onboard Computer 
Nvidia Jetson Nano 
 
Fig. 5. System architecture 
118
 SYSTEM HARDWARE COMPONENTS 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
Algorithm I: GNSS-Denied Navigation 
1: 
Get list of waypoints and current location 
2: 
Initialize: 𝑛= 0, 
3: 
Initialize: current location at origin (𝑃𝑐= [0
0
0]𝑇) 
4: 
while number_of_waypoints > 0 do 
5: 
if 𝑛= 0 then 
6: 
Capture the first frame and features 
7: 
else 
8: 
Calculate displacement vector (𝐷𝑛) 
9: 
Update current location ( 𝑃𝑐) 
10: 
if number_of_features < 31 then 
11: 
Calculate 30 more features 
12: 
Calculate current velocity (𝑣′) 
13: 
Calculate filtered current velocity (𝑣) 
14: 
Calculate positional error from first waypoint (𝑒) 
15: 
Calculate velocity error (𝑒𝑣) 
16: 
Calculate linear accelerations (𝑎𝑐𝑐) 
17: 
Calculate roll angle (𝜙), pitch angle (𝜃) and thrust 
(𝐹𝐵) 
18: 
Send the attitude commands to the flight controller 
19: 
if [— 2
— 2
— 1]
𝑇< 𝑒< [2
2
1]𝑇 then 
20: 
Delete the first waypoint 
21: 
𝑛≔𝑛+ 1  
22: 
end if 
23: 
end while 
70m, however it resulted in a lower frame rate. Lowering the 
speed also reduced the error. Therefore, a maximum speed of 
5m/s and a maximum flying altitude of 70m was chosen for 
our subsequent testing. Values above these tend to have high 
errors. 
C. Motion Estimation  
Due to high frequency vibrations in the raw position and 
velocity estimates, a low-pass filter was used. The constant 𝑘 
of the low pass filter was then tuned by observing the 
smoothness and time delay of the velocity plots before and 
after applying the filter. Increasing the value of 𝑘 increased the 
smoothness of the curve but also increased the time delay. The 
amplitude of vibrations tends to increase on higher altitudes. 
Thus, instead of having a constant value for 𝑘, it was set as a 
linear function of altitude. 
                                      𝑘= 0.1 + 0.0036 ∗𝑧                            (29) 
where 𝑧 is the altitude of the UAV. 
D. Navigational Controller  
The navigational controller was first tested in the ArduPilot 
SITL (Software In The Loop) simulator. A setpoint 𝑃𝑠=
(20, 20, 20) was given to the UAV and the motion of the 
UAV was analysed by varying wind direction and wind speed 
from 0 to 7m/s. The displacement vector 𝐷𝑛 was simulated by 
calculating displacements along two perpendicular directions, 
the UAV’s heading and 90° clockwise to it using GPS 
locations. 
As the navigational controller always directs the UAV to 
the destination, deviation due to wind causes a deviation from 
its trajectory but not a deviation from its destination. This was 
also seen in the simulations where, the UAV was able to reach 
the destination with very less deviations (3-4m) even when it 
was subjected to wind gusts. The displacement plots were 
analysed to tune the PID controller’s parameters: 𝐾𝑝, 𝐾𝑑, 𝐾𝑖 in 
consecutive iterations of the code. Fig. 6 shows the desired 
trajectory and the actual trajectory followed in SITL. The RMS 
error was 1.16m, max error was 2.25m for a total distance of 
28.28m. The percentage RMS error per distance travelled was 
4.1%. 
After tuning the parameters of the PID controller in SITL, 
they were tweaked manually during test flights for required 
velocity vector (𝑣𝑟⃗⃗⃗⃗) set as 0, till the desired response was 
obtained. Further, the required velocity vector’s (𝑣𝑟⃗⃗⃗⃗) curve 
with varying slopes by changing 𝑎 was tested in actual flights. 
Higher values of 𝑎 resulted in very gradual slope which 
reduced the speed of the UAV near the destination point. 
Lower values of 𝑎 resulted in a steep slope which caused 
overshooting and oscillations. Therefore, an optimal value was 
chosen after analysing the response on multiple outdoor flight 
tests. 
Finally, the state estimator and navigational controller were 
coupled together and actual flights were performed with 
various trajectories at various altitudes. The obtained 
parameters were finalised through multiple flight tests. Fig. 7 
and Fig. 8 show the response of actual filtered current velocity 
to the input required velocity along 𝑥 and 𝑦 axes respectively. 
The tuned values of all the parameters of the controller are 
listed in Table III. Complete outdoor flight missions from take-
off, waypoint navigation, landing and return to launch were 
performed on the UAV. 
Such a mission’s planned trajectory and actual followed 
trajectory is plotted in Fig. 9. The RMS error was 15.45m, max 
error was 50.25m for a total distance of 2093.56m. The flight 
was done on a desert terrain with patches of plants. The UAV 
flew in wind gusts of 2-3m/s at an altitude of 70m above 
ground. The results of some other flight tests are tabulated in 
Table IV. Shifting from autonomous GNSS aided navigation 
to the developed GNSS-denied navigation solution was tested 
multiple times. Switching between these modes and the 
trajectory followed is plotted in Fig. 10. 
As mentioned previously in Section I, the aim was to come 
up with a solution applicable at high altitudes (>50m) using the 
most trivial payloads on the UAV. A monocular camera is 
required in any surveillance, reconnaissance or HADR 
missions. The same can be simultaneously used by our 
presented solution. Hence, our solution does not need any 
additional sensor payloads like [6] & [10]. The Nvidia Jetson 
Nano is chosen due to its high performance and low power, 
space and weight constraints. It has a Quad-Core ARM 
Cortex-A57 processor which has been proved to be sufficient 
for our algorithm. Thus, our solution is computationally lighter 
as neither it requires multiple flight computers as in [7] & [8] 
nor it needs a significantly powerful CPU as in [9]. 
119
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.7]
 
Fig. 6. Plot of desired trajectory (blue) and followed trajectory (orange) in 
SITL 
 
Fig. 7. Plot of required velocity (blue) and current filtered velocity (red) along 
x-axis 
 
Fig. 8. Plot of required velocity (blue) and current filtered velocity (red) along 
y-axis 
TABLE III.  VALUES OF ALL PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value after simulations 
Final value after flight tests 
𝑘 
0.1 
0.1 – 0.28 
𝐾𝑝 
0.9 
0.9 
𝐾𝑑 
0.03 
0.02 
𝐾𝑖 
0.02 
0.015 
𝑎 
4 
5 
 
 
Fig. 9. Plot of planned trajectory (orange) and actual trajectory (blue) in 
outdoor flight 
 
Fig. 10. Switching between GNSS enabled and GNSS disabled flight modes 
TABLE IV. FLIGHT TEST RESULTS 
Distance 
Travelled (in m) 
Maximum 
distance from 
home (in m) 
Maximum 
error (in m) 
% error 
(in %) 
100 
100 
2 
2 
340 
100 
4 
1.17 
400 
280 
5 
1.25 
600 
200 
10 
1.67 
2000 
1000 
50 
2.5 
 
Moreover, the GPU of the flight computer is left unutilized 
to run GPU extensive applications such as ML algorithms 
parallelly. For example, in an HADR mission, our solution 
navigates the UAV in GNSS denied/loss patches using the 
monocular camera and the CPU of the flight computer, while 
its GPU is utilized to run an object classifier (like YOLO) to 
detect humans using feed from the same monocular camera. 
The overall system is highly modular as it has no constraints 
on hardware used, using high resolution cameras with more 
powerful computers will result in higher accuracy at even 
higher flight altitudes. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
With this paper, the problem of GNSS signal loss during 
outdoor navigation has been addressed by presenting a novel 
computationally lighter solution of GNSS-denied navigation. 
120
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.8]
The hardware used is low-cost and has low space and power 
requirements, making our solution implementable on lighter 
and smaller UAVs. Moreover, due to its computationally 
lighter nature, it can run in parallel with other applications 
such as video-downlink, target detection, etc. on the same 
onboard computer. This makes this solution suitable for 
practical HADR missions. 
Some extensions to this work are planned for future, aimed 
at increasing the reliability of GNSS-denied navigation: 
 Introduction of an EKF based switching between 
GNSS aided and GNSS denied navigation. 
 Using pre fetched satellite images of terrain with GPS 
locations and matching them with terrain images taken 
during flight as a corrective measure to significantly 
reduce error during long distance flights. 
 Integrating the present algorithm with IMUs along 
with rangefinder/altimeter to increase accuracy and 
relaxing zero-yaw constraint to increase practicality. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. P. Valavanis, and G. J. Vachtsevanos, “UAV applications: 
introduction.” Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2015, pp. 2639–2641 
[2] Y. Li, M. Scanavino, E. Capello, F. Dabbene, G. Guglieri, and A. 
Vilardi, “A novel distributed architecture for UAV indoor navigation”, 
Transportation Research Procedia Volume 35, Dec. 2018, pp. 13-22 
[3] M. Nahangi, A. Heins, B. McCabe, and A. Schoellig, “Automated 
localization of UAVs in GPS-denied indoor construction environments 
using fiducial markers”, 35th International Symposium on Automation 
and Robotics in Construction, July 2018. 
[4] M. Shan, F. Wang, F. Lin, Z. Gao, Y. Z. Tang, and B. M. Chen, 
“Google Map aided visual navigation for UAVs in GPS-denied 
environment”, IEEE Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, 2015 
[5] M. Sharifi, X. Chen, and C. G. Pretty, “Experimental study on using 
visual odometry for navigation in outdoor GPS-denied environments”, 
12th IEEE/ASME International Conference on Mechatronic and 
Embedded Systems and Applications (MESA), 2016 
[6] S. Ashraf, P. Aggarwal, P. Damacharla, H. Wang, A. Y. Javaid and V. 
Devabhaktuni, “A low-cost solution for unmanned aerial vehicle 
navigation in a global positioning system–denied environment”, 
International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, Vol. 14, 2018. 
[7] A. D. Wu, E. N. Johnson, M. Kaess, F. Dellaert, and G. Chowdhary, 
“Autonomous flight in GPS-denied environments using monocular 
vision and inertial sensors”, AIAA J. of Aerospace Information Systems, 
Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 172-186, 2013. 
[8] G. Chowdhary, E. N. Johnson, D. Magree, and A. Wu, “GPS-denied 
indoor and outdoor monocular vision aided navigation and control of 
unmanned aircraft”, Journal of Field Robotics, 2013 
[9] D. Magree, and E. N. Johnson, “A monocular vision-aided inertial 
navigation system with improved numerical stability” AIAA Guidance, 
Navigation, and Control Conference, 2015 
[10] K. Mohta, K. Sun, S. Liu, M. Watterson, B. Pfrommer, J. Svacha, Y. 
Mulgaonkar, C. J. Taylor, and V. Kumar, “Experiments in fast, 
autonomous, GPS-denied quadrotor flight”, IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2018 
[11] Antonio C. B. Chiella,1 Henrique N. Machado,1 Bruno O. S. Teixeira,1 
and Guilherme A. S. Pereira2  GNSS/LiDAR-Based Navigation of an 
Aerial  Robot in Sparse Forests 
[12] K. Thu, and A. I. Gavrilova, “Designing and modeling of quadcopter 
control system using L1 adaptive control”, 12th International 
Symposium Intelligent Systems INTELS’16, Oct. 2016 
[13] E. G. Hernandez-Martinez, G. Fernandez-Anaya, E. D. Ferreira, J. J. 
Flores-Godoy, and A. Lopez-Gonzalez, “Trajectory tracking of a 
quadcopter UAV with optimal translational control”, 11th IFAC 
Symposium on Robot Control (SYROCO), 2015, pp. 226-231 
[14] J. Shi, and C. Tomasi, “Good features to track”, 9th IEEE Conference 
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1994, Springer pp. 593–
600.  
[15] H. Bay, A. Ess, T. Tuytelaars, and L. V. Gool, “Speeded up robust 
features”, Computer Vision and Image Understanding, Vol. 10, 200 
[16] Y. Zhang, T. Wang, Z. Cai, Y. Wang, and Z. You, "The use of optical 
flow for UAV motion estimation in indoor environment", IEEE Chinese 
Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference (CGNCC), Nanjing, 
2016, pp. 785-790, doi: 10.1109/CGNCC.2016.7828885. 
[17] J. Bouguet, “Pyramidal implementation of the affine Lucas Kanade 
feature tracker description of the algorithm”, Intel Corporation, 2001.
 
121
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
