warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0296.pdf
sha256: 4DCCA466A56ADE5A4021F17EAFDDEA96702F2D771308F1F04F7F541CF31093AF
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 5
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Optical Flow Sensor Integrated Navigation System for Quadrotor in GPS-Denied 
Environment 
Shang-En Tsai and Shih-Hsien Zhuang 
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering 
Chang Jung Christian University 
Tainan 701, ROC 
e-mail: sean@mail.cjcu.edu.tw, cbabeta@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—The issues about navigation precision and indoor 
hovering of micro aerial vehicles (MAV) have been discussed 
frequently nowadays. This practical study presented a 
dedicated design for indoor hovering that is more precise than 
using GPS positioning. We adapted optical flow sensors and 
ultrasound sensors to comply indoor/outdoor hover mode. This 
design is safer, cheaper, and easier for users to control the 
MAV flight. The practical results showed the proposed scheme 
could reduce the errors of navigation parameters and achieve 
stable hovering performance under different conditions of 
lighting. 
Keywords-quadrotor; navigation system; optical flow sensor 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In this paper, an optical flow sensor/INS/magnetometer 
integrated navigation system is proposed for micro aerial 
vehicles (MAV) [1]-[2], where optical flow sensor is used to 
measure the velocity and position of the MAV are the most 
widely used navigation techniques for the MAV. 
A reliable navigation system is very important for safely 
operating the MAV. Currently, global positioning system 
(GPS) [3] and inertial navigation system (INS). GPS is based 
on satellite which can provide relatively consistent accuracy 
navigation; however, the satellite signals would be lost in 
city canyon or indoor environments. 
In UAV navigation, feature detectors and extractors are 
often used for object detection; optical flow techniques are 
used to distinguish motion in a scene; visual servoing is 
employed to translate image frame motion into UAV 
displacement; whereas 3D reconstruction methods are 
exploited for navigation and mapping. 
Optical flow is a family of techniques that focuses on 
determining motion from images, which can provide reliable 
velocity and position information when applied for robot 
localization or navigation. More precisely, optical flow can 
be defined as the apparent motion of feature points or 
patterns in a 2D image of the 3D environment. Although 
providing useful navigation information, optical flow 
algorithms are usually time consuming. Chao et al. [4] 
remark for instance that usually, optical flow algorithms 
perform well with image sequences presenting much slower 
motions compared to UAV flights. These methods can 
nevertheless still be considered, for example, in near-
hovering operation of UAVs. 
A comprehensive analysis of existing optical flow 
techniques is performed by Baker et al. in [5]. As stated in 
their concluding remarks, at the time of their publication, 
the most promising optical flow detection approach was the 
one presented by Sun et al. [6]. This study will use optical 
flow sensor combined with gyro, accelerator, and 
magnetometer for a quadrotor comply indoor loiter mode.  
II. 
SYSTEM SETUP 
A.  Flight controller architecture 
 
Flight control board：PX4 autopilot is an open-
source autopilot system oriented toward inexpensive 
autonomous aircraft. Low cost and availability 
enable hobbyist use in small remotely piloted aircraft. 
Several vendors are currently producing PX4 
autopilots and accessories. Regarding sensors in 
Arducopters, these platforms come with the ability 
of customization. The newer Pixhawk controller 
implemented comes with built-in gyroscopes, 
accelerometers and pressure sensors, as shown in fig. 
1 [7].  
 
Mission Planner：Mission Planner is an open source 
Ground Control System (GCS) which is able to 
check, setup, and control unmanned aerial vehicles 
(UAV) like autonomous multicopters, fixed-wing 
aircraft, traditional helicopters and ground rovers. 
Mission Planner is an award winning platform that 
won the 2012 and 2014 UAV Outback Challenge 
competitions. Later, the system was improved to 
replace thermopiles with an Inertial Measurement 
Unit (IMU) using a combination of accelerometers, 
gyroscopes and magnetometers. 
 
QGroundControl：QGroundControl is an operator 
control unit / ground control software for micro air 
vehicles. It allows instant visualization and control 
of micro air vehicles during development and 
operation, both indoors and outdoors. With a flexible 
software architecture it supports multiple MAV 
types/autopilot 
projects. 
QGroundControl 
was 
mainly developed by Lorenz Meier at ETH Zurich as 
the Ground Control Station software for the 
PIXHAWK Project. By now it evolved into an open-
source application used at multiple universities 
worldwide and with many active contributors. 
 
Ultrasonic Ranging Module：An ultrasonic range 
sensor is used to measure the distance towards the 
scene and to scale optical flow values to metric 
87
2016 International Conference on Robotics and Automation Engineering
978-1-5090-4072-8/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
velocity values. It transmits ultrasonic waves into the 
air and detects reflected waves from an object. There 
are many applications for ultrasonic sensors, such as 
in intrusion alarm systems, automatic door openers 
and backup sensors for automobiles. We use the 
manufacturer 
Maxbotix's 
MB1202 
I2CXL-
MaxSonar to return the data of distance and to do 
wide beam detection, reliable people detection, or 
reliable small obstacle detection. 
FPV
Optical flow 
sensor
Sonar
GPS
ESC
Motors
Speed control
Flight control board
RC receiver
PPM 
encoder
Battery
Passed instructions
Coded instructions
Voltage check
Remote controler
Charger
Ground control 
station
User
Quadrotor
Battery charg
Send 
instructions
Ultrasonic 
Ranging Module
 
Figure 1. Flight controller architecture showing main modules with update rates 
 
B. Optical Flow Sensor  
 
Optical flow sensor module PX4Flow [8, 9]: Sold by 
3D Robotics Inc, PX4Flow is an open-source 
instrument to assist the hovering of UAV indoor. 
Optical flow estimation is based on SAD block 
matching. Dedicated integer vector instructions of 
the Cortex M4 are used. They allow for the 
computation of the SAD value of four pixels in 
parallel within a single CPU clock. The SAD value 
of a 8×8 pixel block is calculated within a search 
area of ±4 pixels in both directions. The position of 
the minimum SAD block value out of the 81 
candidates is taken as the flow value at the 
corresponding sample point. A total of 64 sample 
points is processed per frame. A subsequent 
histogram filter takes into account every sample 
point and choses the histogram bin with the highest 
value. It can compute with 120Hz speed in a dimmer 
environment (such as indoor space) without the need 
of LED lamination. We will reprogram it for other 
basic and but efficient low-level visual missions. The 
earliest record of using PX4Flow is back to 2012, 
but they were never being under the spotlight until 
recent years. This results in optical flow values with 
one pixel resolution. A search range of ±4 pixels in 
combination with a 16mm focal length lens 
corresponds to ±1.5 meters per second for an object 
at one meter distance at 250 frames per second.  
III. 
REAL-TIME POSE ESTIMATION 
The drift of inertial navigation system (INS) will lead to 
large navigation error when a low-cost INS is used in micro 
aerial vehicles (MAV). In this study, an optical flow 
sensor/INS/magnetometer integrated navigation system is 
proposed for MAV. In this work, which is based on EKF, 
combines optical flow sensor, INS, and magnetometer 
information to estimate the attitude, velocity, and position of 
MAV. Specifically, the gyro, accelerator, and magnetometer 
information are fused together to estimate the MAV attitude 
when the MAV is static or uniformly moving; and the gyro 
only is used to estimate the MAV attitude when the MAV is 
accelerating or decelerating. An INS optical flow integrated 
navigation scheme is proposed in this paper. The scheme, 
which is based on extended Kalman filter, combines INS and 
optical flow information to estimate the velocity and position 
of MAV. The gyro and accelerator are fused together to 
estimate the MAV attitude when the MAV is at static state or 
uniformly moving state; and the gyro only is used to estimate 
the MAV attitude when the MAV is accelerating or 
decelerating. Experiment results show that the proposed 
method which can significantly reduce the errors for 
navigation position, velocity, and attitude, compared with the 
INS only navigation system, can effectively improve the 
navigation performance of MAV with a significant value of 
engineering application. 
For real-time control, low latency, accurate, fast and 
robust estimate of the location is required. We fuse data from 
all of the sources providing motion information to output 
high frequency state estimate as shown in the Fig. 2. A high 
rate attitude estimator at 250Hz on the flight controller unit 
88
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
(FCU) is used to stabilize the robot’s angular motion. 
Angular velocity is compensated using an onboard 
gyroscope to estimate correctly the translational velocity. 
Automatic exposure control allows usage in outdoor and 
indoor environments. A robust full state with 9DoF position 
estimator capable of fusing data is designed from optical 
flow height measurement and inertial sensors using an EKF 
running on the FCU at 100Hz. 
 
EKF
PX4flow
Position
Controller
Attitude
Controller
Update
Covariance
Matrix
Update
States
Predict
Covariance
Matrix
Predict
States
IMU data
IMU
Pixhawk
Flow/
Velocity
CPU
3D Gyro
CMOS
Imager
Microcontroller
Sonar
Frame
Grabber
D
M
A
M
E
M
O
R
Y
 
Figure 2. Software architecture showing main modules 
IV. 
THE RESEARCH OF AUTONOMOUS HOVERING 
A.  Optical Flow Sensor Setup-PX4Flow 
This paper is to test if the utilization of optical sensor can 
make the MAV achieve indoor hovering, as shown in Fig. 3. 
One need to gather the data of PX4/Flow from the open-
source database Github. The operation of PX4Flow is rely on 
GCS: QGroundControl will check the parameter and adjust 
the focus of the camera, as shown in Fig. 4. All the flying 
data can be downloaded from the flight control and checked 
by Mission Planner. The consistency of the body and Gyro 
waves can determine the performance of hovering, as shown 
in Fig. 5. 
 
Figure  3. PX4Flow. 
The principle of optical flow sensor is based on the 
continuous shooting and calculation of the displacement 
difference between two successive pictures. This difference 
of displacement is transmitted to the flight control by I2C 
and the flight control will signal the motors of the four wings 
to control the movement of MAV and achieve govering. The 
ultrasonic detection module can deliver the precise flight 
distance to the flight control and maintain the altitude of the 
MAV. The utilization of optical sensor and ultrasonic 
detection module can efficiently enable the hovering of 
MAV without using GPS. In order to further improve this 
operation, an independent distance detection module is 
required. Besides, the fine tuning of the focus of the camera 
and the data accumulation and adaptation by the firmware 
are also critical to achieve this function  
 
 
Figure 4. PX4Flow checking. 
 
 
Figure 5. Review DataFlash log optical flow calibration value. 
 
B. Experiments and Verification 
The platform for my experiment is a customized MAV as 
shown in Fig.6. The experiment location was in the Chang 
89
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
Jung Christian University, Taiwan. The flying distance was 
100 meters, and the flight height is 2.5 meters.  
 
 
Figure 6. Micro air vehicle platform. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Optical flow value graph – Indoor 
 
 
Figure 8. Optical flow data value graph - Outdoor/ noon. 
 
 
Figure 9. Optical flow value graph – Outdoor/ evening. 
 
The effect of three different types of light (the indoor, the 
outdoor/noon, and the outdoor/evening light) to the optical 
flow sensor is compared and shown in three figures (Fig. 7-
9). First, IMU and OF is compared in the figures. IMU.GyrX 
represents the X axis of the gyroscope and the large 
fluctuations are caused by vertical movement of the MAV in 
the x axis. On the other hand, the small fluctuations are from 
the movement of the MAV in the y axis and thus relatively 
smaller than the ones in the x axis. OF.bodyX represents the 
x axis of the gyroscope of PX4Flow and because it is 
installed in the same direction as IMU, the vibration curve is 
consistent with the one of IMU. OF.flowX represents the x 
axis of the optical flow. 
The OF.flowX of 
the 
outdoor/evening light is significantly less vibrated than the 
one of indoor light. The OF.flowX of outdoor/noon is even 
less fluctuated but still not yet perfectly without vibration 
due to the shade caused by the sun in the upright position. In 
90
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
conclusion, the performance of the optical flow sensor is 
closely related to the light according to the figures shown.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This work start from the design and assembly of the 
quadrotor equipped with optical flow sensor to achieve 
hovering indoor. This design is safer, cheaper, and easier for 
users to control the MAV. The drift of inertial navigation 
system (INS) will lead to large navigation error when a low-
cost INS is used in microaerial vehicles (MAV). To 
overcome 
the 
above 
problem, 
an 
INS/optical 
flow/magnetometer 
integrated 
navigation 
scheme 
is 
proposed for GPS-denied environment in this paper. The 
scheme, which is based on extended Kalman filter, combines 
INS and optical flow information to estimate the velocity and 
position of MAV. The gyro, accelerator, and magnetometer 
information are fused together to estimate the MAV attitude 
when the MAV is at static state or uniformly moving state; 
and the gyro only is used to estimate the MAV attitude when 
the MAV is accelerating or decelerating. The MAV flight 
data is used to verify the proposed integrated navigation 
scheme, for both indoor and outdoor navigation. The 
verification results show that the proposed scheme can 
achieve hovering under different conditions of lighting and 
effectively improve navigation precision. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Friedman, I. Chopra, and O. Rand, “Indoor/outdoor scanmatching 
based mapping technique with a helicopter MAV in GPS-denied 
environment,” International Journal of Micro AirVehicles, vol. 7, no. 
1, pp. 55–70, 2015.  
[2] C. Shen, Z. Bai, H. Cao, K. Xu, C. Wang, H. Zhang, D. Wang, J. 
Tang, J. Liu, Optical Flow Sensor/INS/Magnetometer Integrated 
Navigation System for MAV in GPS-Denied Environment. Journal of 
Sensors, vol. 2016. 
[3] G. Flores, S. T. Zhou, R. Lozano, and P. Castillo, “A vision and GPS-
based real-time trajectory planning for a MAV in unknown and low-
sunlight environments,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, vol. 
74, no. 1-2, pp. 59–67, 2014. 
[4] H. Chao, Y. Gu, M. Napolitano, A Survey of Optical Flow 
Techniques for Robotics Navigation Applications Journal of 
Intelligent and Robotic Systems 2014, vol. 73, pp.361–372. 
[5] S. Baker, D. Scharstein, J. Lewis, S. Roth, M. J. Black, R. Szeliski, A 
database and evaluation methodology for optical flow. International 
Journal of Computer Vision, 2011, vol. 92, pp.1–31. 
[6] D. Sun, S. Roth, M.J. Black, Secrets of optical flow estimation and 
their principles. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), San Francisco, CA, USA, 
13–18 June 2010, pp. 2432–2439. 
[7] PIXHAWK 
Autopilot. 
Available 
online: 
http://pixhawk.org/modules/pixhawk (accessed on 22 December 2014. 
[8] PIXHAWK 
PX4FLOW. 
Available 
online: 
https://pixhawk.org/modules/px4flow (accessed on 22 December 
2014). 
[9] D. Honegger, L. Meier, P. Tanskanen, M. Pollefeys: An open Source 
and Open Hardware Embedded Metric Optical Flow CMOS Camera 
for Indoor and Outdoor Applications. In: International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation. ICRA 2013. 
 
 
91
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
