warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0598.pdf
sha256: 75F9E28A78E1AE9FE20914C4EA70E48D53FF6F3145EC99578CFA2671750869E2
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 4
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Compact Passive Millimeter Wave Imager for 
Degraded Visual and GPS-Denied Navigation 
 
Thomas Dillon 
Phase Sensitive Innovations, Inc. 
116 Sandy Drive, Suite A
Newark, DE 19716 
dillon@phasesensitiveinc.com 
 
Christopher Schuetz  
Phase Sensitive Innovations, Inc. 
116 Sandy Drive, Suite A
Newark, DE 19716 
schuetz@phasesensitiveinc.com 
 
Andrew Wright  
Phase Sensitive Innovations, Inc. 
116 Sandy Drive, Suite A
Newark, DE 19716 
wright@phasesensitiveinc.com 
 
Stephen Kozacik 
EM Photonics, Inc. 
51 East Main Street, Suite 201
Newark, DE 19711 
kozacik@emphotonics.com 
 
Zachary El-Azom 
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering 
University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19713 
elazomz@udel.edu 
 
Shouyuan Shi 
Department of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 
University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19713 
shi@udel.edu 
 
Dennis Prather 
Department of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 
University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19713 
dprather@udel.edu 
 
Adam Rutkowski 
Munitions Directorate
Air Force Research Laboratory
Eglin AFB, FL 32542 
adam.rutkowksi@us.af.mil
 
Abstract—We present a passive millimeter wave imager for 
aerial vehicle navigation in degraded visual and GPS-denied 
environments.  The sensor employs aperture synthesis imaging 
techniques with optical upconversion of millimeter wave signals 
and coherent reconstruction in the optical domain to enable a 
suitably small form factor. 
Keywords—millimeter wave, GPS-denied navigation, degraded 
visual environments, aperture synthesis, distributed aperture 
imaging, optical upconversion 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Phase Sensitive Innovations (PSI) has been working for the 
past few years on a low size, weight, and power (SWaP), passive 
millimeter wave (pmmW) imaging sensor for the Air Force. [1]  
During that time, we have made significant progress towards 
realizing a suitable W-Band sensor, ultimately to be flight tested 
on a small, fixed-wing aircraft.  The sensor will serve as a 
navigational aid on Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) in theaters 
of operation including GPS-denied and/or degraded visual 
environments (DVE).  PSI has leveraged sophisticated 
simulations tools, device-level research, and advanced 
manufacturing techniques to reach our current level of 
accomplishment on this real-time, video-rate, W-Band (~84-90 
GHz) pmmW imager, as represented by Figure 1.  Enclosed is 
an overview of the application, hardware build, and use of the 
data for navigation.  Over the next year, PSI will conclude 
development of system components, assemble these into a 
functional system, and perform operational validation tests, both 
ground-based and in flight, with the assistance of the Air Force. 
II. BACKGROUND 
In many theaters of operation, aerial vehicles lack reliable 
access to the U.S. global positioning system (GPS) and must 
employ other means for navigation.  Potential solutions in such 
GPS-denied environments include visible or infrared sensors 
used to image ground features, in conjunction with a terrain 
database for aircraft geolocation or an optical flow-based 
navigational approach.  
 
Fig. 1. Notional representation of PSI passive millimeter wave imager being 
flown on a UAS for GPS-denied navigation. 
Sensors operating at visible or infrared wavelengths, 
however, are inadequate for many deployment scenarios, 
particularly in the presence of cloud cover, smoke, fog, and other 
atmospheric obscurants that obscure viewing.  Visible sensors 
are furthermore inoperable at night, while infrared sensors suffer 
limited performance during diurnal temperature inversions.  
Millimeter wave sensors are attractive due to their ability to 
provide see-through imaging in such degraded visual 
environments, 
thereby 
providing 
persistent 
situational 
awareness and navigational capability. [2] 
 
Fig. 2. Plot of atmospheric transmission model with transmission "windows" 
noted for a range of conditions; adapted from code provided by Bruce Wallace. 
[mmW Concepts, LLC] 














clear
fog
rain
dust
raincloud
Attenuation - dB/km
Frequency - GHz
wavelength - mm
  millimeter wave  
35  GHz
77  GHz
94  GHz
140  GHz
  submillimeter 
wave  
220  GHz
340  GHz
978-1-7281-0602-1/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:10:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
 
Fig. 3. Illustration of optical upconversion receiver operation concept. 
Several frequency bands exist (e.g. those near 35, 95, 140, 
and 220 GHz) where atmospheric attenuation is relatively low 
(on the order of 1 dB/km), see Figure 2, and therefore suitable 
for operation of a pmmW sensor.  The longer wavelengths 
relative to typical airborne particulates allows mmW signals to 
penetrate through many common atmospheric obscurants, such 
as fog, dust, cloud cover, light rain, smoke, and blowing sand, 
with millions of times less loss as compared to visible or infrared 
signals.  Millimeter wave imaging is helpful in mitigating all 
eleven types of DVE as identified by AMRDEC. [3] 
We have developed a pmmW sensor technology employing 
distributed aperture imaging (DAI) [4], as illustrated by Figures 
3 and 4, to realize large effective aperture sizes within a form 
factor highly amenable to platform integration.  The DAI 
approach results in an essentially two-dimensional system form 
factor.  In contrast, traditional imager techniques, such as focal 
plane arrays or scanned systems, require a volumetric increase 
in imager size, and consequently weight, to improve imager 
resolution.  Thus, such systems are largely impractical for many 
applications, such as deployment on small aerial vehicles. 
 
Fig. 4. 220-channel, 77 GHz pmmW imager (left) realized using aperture 
synthesis, which has since reached TRL 6.  Still images of test targets extracted 
from passive video-rate imagery produced by this sensor are shown (right). 
The DAI sensor uses electro-optic modulation techniques to 
convert received millimeter wave radiation into sidebands on an 
optical carrier, as shown in Figure 3, a process which preserves 
amplitude and phase information from each sensor node as 
required for subsequent coherent image reconstruction. [5], [6]  
Conceptually, this imaging approach may be thought of as a 
technique for discretely sampling the millimeter wave signal, 
converting the captured complex amplitude to optical 
wavelengths using high-speed electro-optic modulators, routing 
upconverted signals to an optical fiber array that mimics the 
mmW array geometry, performing a continuous spatial Fourier 
transform of the discretely sampled aperture output from the 
fiber array using simple optics, and finally, capturing 
regenerated imagery in real time using a standard optical 
camera.  The imaging receiver generates full two-dimensional 
images of the entire field of view at a rate limited only by the 
camera acquisition, which can be more than 1 kHz, without the 
need for significant post-processing hardware. 
 
Fig. 5. A single frame from a captured flight video in visible (left) and with a 
pmmW inlay (right) taken at a ~20 degree down-look angle.  Features of the 
bridge, river, and roadway are clearly evident in the pmmW image and could 
conceivably be used as navigational cues for an aerial vehicle. 
Many key risk elements associated with deploying this 
pmmW imaging technology have been largely retired.  Passive 
mmW imagers based on the DAI approach have been fabricated 
and flight tested, and these developments are directly applicable 
to a low size, weight, and power (SWaP) sensor designed for 
aerial vehicle navigation, see Figure 5.  To date, our pmmW 
imaging sensor has been proven in flight operation at 30 Hz 
frame rate with 2.5 K noise equivalent temperature difference 
and over 2500 effective pixels generated from ~200 sensor 
nodes.  This system experienced high levels of shock and 
vibration during flight, without any apparent degradation in 
system performance.  To our knowledge, this was the first ever 
flight demonstration of a passive millimeter wave imager based 
on optical upconversion and aperture synthesis. 
While pmmW imaging technology has demonstrated much 
promise for navigation in DVE and GPS-denied environments, 
the earlier versions of our imager exhibit SWaP incompatible 
with many small aerial vehicles such as a class 3 UAV.  A 
variety of additional platforms and application areas could be 
accessed by further reducing the cost, size, weight, and power 
(c-SWaP) of the imager.  Compared to previous imager 
specifications, the presently contemplated platforms require an 
order of magnitude reduction in size and weight and thus 
necessitate significantly different approaches to the design of 
key components within the imager.  To this end, we have made 
substantial changes to the receiver front-end, e.g. the optical 
upconversion modules, as well as the back-end optical 
processor. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:10:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]

Fig. 6. Simulated pmmW imagery for a nadir-looking, 60 channel, low SWaP 
sensor at 1000 feet altitude with a 20° field of view and various sky 
temperatures corresponding to a range of atmospheric humidity levels. 
Predicted imagery for the presently contemplated, low 
SWaP sensor is shown in Figure 6 for various sky temperatures 
and ground features.  These simulations were validated using 
prior flight test imagery from the sensor shown in Figure 4.  The 
images indicate that sufficient information is present to employ 
subsequent image processing techniques to extract features and 
use these in a navigational algorithm to guide the aircraft. 
III. HARDWARE 
A unique aspect of the low SWaP imager is the receiver 
panel, shown in Figure 7, which features optical upconversion 
receiver modules laid out in a fish-scale or shingle-like 
configuration.  This packaging approach allows the modules to 
fit more densely into the array while maintaining the desired low 
profile.  Previous receiver designs, such as that shown in Figure 
4, used horn antennas with metal waveguides and amplifiers 
packaged in precision machined housings, which are bulky and 
heavy and place the module’s hardware behind the antenna, 
resulting in a relatively thick front-end over 12 inches in depth. 
 
Fig. 7. Proposed “fish scale” design for UAV based pmmW navigation aid 
uses flexible Rogers PCB-based upconversion modules in a 3-D printed plate 
attached to the bottom of the UAS to achieve a 0.3-meter aperture with an 
overall thickness of ~3 cm and a total approximate weight of 0.6 to 1 kg, 
depending on the fill factor (i.e. density) of the 3-D printed structure. 
To enable a lower profile and reduced SWaP, here we 
leverage printed circuit board (PCB) manufacturing and PSI’s 
RF packaging skills to produce thin receiver modules that are 
layered like fish-scale at a 10° angle.  3-D printing is the 
enabling technology to realize a robust, completely custom 
structure to support the receiver modules in the prescribed 
orientation.  As seen in Figure 7, the receiver modules are 
inserted into slots in the front-end plate, such that the antennas 
project out small windows on the underside of the panel.  
Electrical connections are made between module circuit boards 
and the distribution board, which feature cut-outs to 
accommodate the modules, and optical fibers routed to the back-
end processor box.   
 
Fig. 8. PMMW sensor box shown alongside the airframe fuselage reference 
bracket.  The sensor will be mounted to the rails (not shown) for support.  The 
box contains the laser, EDFA, FPGA, receiver board, optical processor, and 
general purpose computer.  The computer provides system level control to the 
user, and also processes images and records data on a solid-state drive. 
The upconversion module houses the hybrid printed circuit 
board, RF front-end components, and the electro-optic 
modulator.  Antenna, low noise amplifiers, RF filters, and 
various waveguide and coupling structures are implemented in 
the high-speed Rogers 4350 material as required.  Optical fiber 
is attached to the modulator in circuit board notches and routed 
from the module.  The board is somewhat flexible and allows a 
tab on the end of the module to bend and mate to a plug on the 
distribution board in the front plate assembly. 
 
Fig. 9. Solidworks model of the upconversion module featuring Rogers 4350 
hybrid printed circuit board with modulator and fiber v-groove assemblies 
attached, with the aluminum housing top and bottom. 
Our first completely assembled narrow-band 94 GHz 
receiver module is shown in Figure 10. The module contains an 
integrated, HFSS-modeled antenna, followed by three W-band 
low noise amplifiers (LNA) with two narrow band filters in 
between the amplifiers. The filters use substrate integrated 
waveguide (SIW) structures to filter the signal with minimal 
reflection of the rejected frequencies. Finally, the boosted signal 
is fed to our high-speed lithium-niobate phase modulators. The 
modulator has an input optical fiber containing the optical 
carrier, followed by an output optical fiber that contains the 
carrier plus the modulated RF signal. 
 
Bridge 
Bridge at Angle 
Road and Ground 
Water and Ground 
Blender simulated 
visible 
 
 
 
 
mmW scene -       
250K sky zenith 
 
 
 
 
mmW scene -        
200K sky zenith 
 
 
 
 
mmW scene -         
85K sky zenith 
 
 
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:10:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
 
Fig. 10.Characterization of the W-band module using a Gunn diode as an 
active RF source, with an OSA to observe the upconverted RF signals. 
As seen to the in Figure 10, we characterized the 
upconversion module using a Gunn diode noise source and 
optical spectrum analyzer.  A 100 mW low noise 1550 nm laser 
is optically fed to the input of the phase modulator.  The 
millimeter wave signal received by the antenna is observed as 
sidebands on the optical carrier, as shown Figure 11.   
 
Fig. 11.Optical output spectrum of the upconversion module, showing 
sidebands containing to the millimater wave signals of interest with the noise 
source turned on and off. 
As shown in Figure 11, we have captured the optical signal 
as a function of wavelength for the receiver module. The 
sideband signal is observed with the noise source on and off; 
with it off, the sideband signal contains the passive thermal noise 
signal present at the output of the front-end, while with it on, the 
signal represents the noise power received from the Gunn diode.  
With proper calibration of the noise source, the Y-factor method 
can be used to extract the noise figure of the receiver.  Additional 
tests to demonstrate passive operation are underway using a 
lock-in amplifier. 
IV.NAVIGATION
Navigation via feature tracking is accomplished by finding 
features in an image and locating these features in a previous or 
future image.  Figure 12 shows two temporal frames of another 
view of the bridge over the river, refer to Figure 5. Blue boxes 
signify detected features in each frame at that time. The green 
boxes show where the features identified in the frame at time t 
were detected by the tracking algorithm in the frame taken at 
time t-1. We then took the detected shifts from this frame and 
computed the coefficients of the affine transformation between 
frames. This test yielded a shift of 9 pixels translation and little 
rotation and scaling, representative of the airframe motion. 
These results match visible inspection well. 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
As discussed throughout, we have now developed and 
matured all of the major hardware components in the proposed 
sensor design.  We also explored approaches to reduce the SWaP 
of the sensor to levels amenable to installation on a UAV 
platform.  These include the use of lightweight substrate 
material for integration of front-end RF components and a 
packaging approach to achieve a thin, lightweight antenna 
aperture.  We have demonstrated an order of magnitude 
reduction in size and weight of the back-end optical processor.  
These improvements in front end and processor combine to yield 
a sensor with a total anticipated weight of less than 5 kg with 
form factors and power draws amenable to UAV deployment. 
 
 
Fig. 12.Frame at t-1 with identified features shown in blue (left).  Frame at t 
with current identified features shown in blue and feature's previous locations 
shown in green (right).  The correlation shows the direction of travel. 
The final outcome of this work will be a flight test of the 
pmmW imager.  Based on airframe constraints and anticipated 
scene contrast for the atmospheric conditions and terrain 
features of interest, we selected a 30 cm sparse aperture 
populated with 60 sensor nodes operating at 94 GHz.  This 
sensor design is expected to provide sensor performance as 
shown in Figure 6.  At an altitude of 1 km, these parameters 
correspond to an FOV of 350 m and a ground resolution of 10.5 
m.  Through mmW phenomenology modeling and scene 
rendering, this level of performance was found sufficient to 
image many terrain features of interest, even under high 
humidity conditions corresponding to rain or fog.  Over the 
course of the next 18 months, this imager will be built and tested. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Shoucri etal., “A passive millimeter wave camera for aircraft landing 
in low visibility conditions,” IEEEAerosp.Electron.Syst.Mag., vol. 10, 
no. 5, pp. 37–42, May 1995. 
[2] 
C. A. Schuetz etal., “Studies of millimeter-wave phenomenology for 
helicopter brownout mitigation,” in Millimetre Wave and Terahertz
SensorsandTechnologyII, 2009, vol. 7485, p. 74850F. 
[3] 
“AMRDEC 
DVE 
Fact 
Sheet.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.amrdec.army.mil/amrdec/pdf/DVE%20Mitigation%20Fact
%20Sheet_2_23_17.pdf. [Accessed: 28-Feb-2019]. 
[4] 
A. R. Harvey and R. Appleby, “Passive mm-wave imaging from UAVs 
using aperture synthesis,” Aeronaut.J., vol. 107, no. 1069, pp. 87–97, 
Feb. 2003. 
[5] 
C. A. Schuetz, J. Murakowski, G. J. Schneider, and D. W. Prather, 
“Radiometric Millimeter-wave detection via optical upconversion and 
carrier suppression,” IEEETrans.Microw.TheoryTech., vol. 53, no. 5, 
pp. 1732–1738, May 2005. 
[6] 
J. Macario et al., “Full spectrum millimeter-wave modulation,” Opt.
Express, vol. 20, no. 21, pp. 23623–23629, Oct. 2012. 
 
   
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:10:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
