warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0544.pdf
sha256: E8BD223DC9AC5F7E2AA7931D04E3266203EF67696D07A133A1B9F689842B8178
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 8
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
10232
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 4, OCTOBER 2022
Season-Invariant GNSS-Denied Visual
Localization for UAVs
Jouko Kinnari
, Francesco Verdoja
, Member, IEEE, and Ville Kyrki
, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Localization without Global Navigation Satellite Sys-
tems (GNSS) is a critical functionality in autonomous operations
of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Vision-based localization on a
known map can be an effective solution, but it is burdened by two
main problems: places have different appearance depending on
weather and season, and the perspective discrepancy between the
UAV camera image and the map make matching hard. In this letter,
we propose a localization solution relying on matching of UAV cam-
era images to georeferenced orthophotos with a trained convolu-
tional neural network model that is invariant to signiﬁcant seasonal
appearance difference (winter-summer) between the camera image
and map. We compare the convergence speed and localization
accuracy of our solution to six reference methods. The results show
major improvements with respect to reference methods, especially
under high seasonal variation. We ﬁnally demonstrate the ability
of the method to successfully localize a real UAV, showing that the
proposed method is robust to perspective changes.
Index Terms—Aircraft navigation, autonomous aerial vehicles,
image matching, pose estimation, robot vision systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
K
NOWING the Earth-ﬁxed coordinates of an UAV is one
of the basic functionalities required for long-distance
autonomous UAV ﬂight. Traditionally, GNSS have been used.
However, GNSS are vulnerable to intentional jamming and
spooﬁng attacks by an adversary, and naturally susceptible to
blockages and reﬂections in radio signal paths.
In an ideal localization system, the UAV could infer its
location using onboard sensors, without having to depend on
availability of any infrastructure. One viable sensor set is a
combination of Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and camera.
Inertial and visual-inertial odometry (VIO) solutions [1] provide
tracking for the egomotion of the vehicle in the short term. As
these solutions integrate noisy signals, a signiﬁcant localization
error accumulates over a longer period without further cor-
rection. Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [2]
systems help in reducing this error in case the UAV traverses
Manuscript received 22 February 2022; accepted 6 July 2022. Date of pub-
lication 15 July 2022; date of current version 2 August 2022. This letter was
recommended for publication by Associate Editor I. Sa. and Editor P. Pounds
upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was supported by Saab
Finland Oy. (Corresponding authors: Francesco Verdoja.)
Jouko Kinnari is with the Saab Finland Oy, 00100 Helsinki, Finland (e-mail:
jouko.kinnari@saabgroup.com).
Francesco Verdoja and Ville Kyrki are with the School of Electrical
Engineering, Aalto University, 02150 Espoo, Finland (e-mail: francesco.
verdoja@aalto.ﬁ; ville.kyrki@aalto.ﬁ).
This
letter
has
supplementary
downloadable
material
available
at
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2022.3191038, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LRA.2022.3191038
Fig. 1.
We develop a similarity scoring method for UAV localization that is
invariant to seasonal appearance change.
the same area a number of times during a mission. However, the
correction of accumulated drift provided by SLAM is only par-
tial, and neither SLAM nor VIO systems provide georeferenced
coordinates without additional information.
In order to provide georeferenced coordinates, a way of
matching sensor observations against a georeferenced map is
needed. Providing a match between the observations of the UAV
and a map is, however, not a trivial task. Not only do imaging
conditions vary due to differences in the imaging hardware,
illumination,andweather,buttheappearanceoftheenvironment
changes signiﬁcantly over seasons.
We propose an image matching approach to season-invariant
localization, where the information contained in an image ac-
quired by a UAV is used for verifying or disputing correspon-
dence to an orthoimage map. Using satellite image data, we train
a model to learn a similarity measure between orthoimages in a
way that is invariant to seasonal change (Fig. 1), and utilize
that model for UAV localization in a Monte-Carlo localiza-
tion (MCL) [3] framework. We demonstrate that, starting from
imprecise initialization, the presented method provides signiﬁ-
cantly shorter time to convergence and smaller localization error
than six baseline methods. Moreover, we illustrate the method’s
operation with real-world data from three UAV ﬂights.
The main contributions of this paper are (i) a solution to
visual UAV geolocalization over signiﬁcant seasonal variation
using a Siamese convolutional neural network (CNN), (ii) a
method using Gaussian kernel density estimation to evaluate the
conﬁdence of the CNN output to be used with MCL, and (iii) a
demonstration of the robustness of the solution using real-world
and simulation data of ﬂights under signiﬁcant seasonal change.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
[p.2]
KINNARI et al.: SEASON-INVARIANT GNSS-DENIED VISUAL LOCALIZATION FOR UAVS
10233
II. RELATED WORK
A key functionality in image-based UAV localization is pro-
viding a way to ﬁnd the correspondence between the UAV image
and a map. Classical manually engineered feature detectors
and descriptors such as SIFT [4] have been proposed by e.g.,
Cesetti et al. [5], but large changes in perspective and seasonal
appearance pose challenges in ﬁnding correspondences. Feature
descriptors speciﬁcally hand-crafted for UAV localization have
also been proposed by Mantelli et al. [6], who modiﬁed the
BRIEF descriptor [7] to utilize color information. However,
we expect color information not to be reliable over signiﬁcant
seasonal appearance change.
Learned features may provide more robust observations for
localization. An example of a recent deep learning-based fea-
ture detector and descriptor applied to UAV localization is by
Hou et al. [8], who demonstrate reduction of odometry error of a
UAV in short trajectories (750 m) in presence of seasonal appear-
ance change. The approach is based on minimizing reprojection
errors of a combination of D2-Net [9] features for map matching
and ORB [10] features for visual odometry. The proposed bundle
adjustment approach requires accurate knowledge of initial pose
and authors show that the solution is not robust to long intervals
between keyframes containing map matching features. The need
for accurate initialization and good image-to-map feature point
matches at short intervals are signiﬁcant downsides in UAV
localization when operating over terrains with long periods of
natural ambiguity (e.g., lakes, ﬁelds).
Semantic features have been used for ﬁnding correspondences
between UAV images and a map. In several works, the observed
UAV image is ﬁrst translated into an intermediate terrain class
classiﬁcation (using a single class such as buildings [11] or
roads [12], [13] or multiple classes [14]–[16]). Next, features
in the semantic representation (such as road [13] and inter-
section geometry [12], [13], generic shape descriptors [16] or
ORB [10] features detected on segmented images [15]) are
used as landmarks for localization. Template matching-based
methods include computing sum of squared differences (SSD)
of semantic classes between map and UAV image [14] and
computing the ratio of building to non-building pixels as a
matchable descriptor [11].
Instead of matching engineered features, image-to-map
matching can be performed in a latent space. Samano et al. [17]
recently proposed to match UAV images to map by using low-
dimensional (16D) embeddings. The projection is learned by
ﬁnding compatible embeddings for a UAV image and a cor-
responding semantic map. The embeddings are matched using
Euclidean distance. Successful localization is demonstrated for
simulated UAV images using MCL. The high reported matching
performance and the availability of source code make [17] a
good comparison approach for our method. Couturier et al. [18]
proposed a similar architecture for global descriptor vector
extraction.
Instead of detecting visual feature points or relying in any
way on a semantic representation, it is possible to use the full
image area for ﬁnding the correspondence of the UAV image
and an orthophoto map. Recent template matching approaches
include the use of Pearson correlation [19] in assessing top-down
UAV image similarity to an orthoimage map [20]. In [21], [22],
authors match UAV images to precomputed images rendered
from preplanned ﬂight paths. To target generality, our focus is on
deriving a solution in which the planned path of the autonomous
agent is allowed to change during a mission, without requiring
signiﬁcant computation before starting to follow the plan.
Another way to approach the UAV localization problem is
to consider it as a sequence of homography transformations
between the UAV image and a base map. Yol et al. [23] vary ho-
mography parameters and maximize mutual information (MI).
Goforth et al. [24] take a similar approach but add a learning
model that transforms the original camera image to a learned
feature space to gain a level of seasonal invariance. In both
works, starting pose is assumed known. Both solutions track
a single hypothesis, which is likely to lead to loss of tracking
capability in case of a long period of ambiguity in terrain or due
to intermittent matching errors.
To enable tracking of multiple pose hypotheses across am-
biguous regions, our work and multiple others (e.g., [6], [15],
[17], [20]) use MCL [3] to fuse odometry and map observations.
Outside UAV localization literature, seasonal variations have
also been addressed in the context of visual place recognition
(VPR) [25], serving as inspiration for our work.
In contrast to the works mentioned above, we present a way
to measure the correctness of a pose hypothesis without relying
on human-chosen features or semantics. We expect this design
choice to allow the matching method to learn a meaningful
representation without being constrained to an explicit deﬁnition
of semantic terrain classes, and without being dependent on
existence of those classes in the terrain over which the ﬂight
occurs.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. UAV Localization
In the full localization problem, there are 6 degrees of freedom
to estimate. To reduce the dimensionality of the problem, we
assume that the roll and pitch angles of the UAV can be inferred
from the direction of gravity, measurable with an IMU. Altitude
is inferred as part of orthoprojection method as presented in
earlier work [26]. The state is then deﬁned as
X = (x, y, φ, s) ,
(1)
where x, y are longitude and latitude of the UAV position in
the map coordinate system, φ is the yaw of the UAV and s is
a scale parameter, which allows the solution to work in case of
scale drift.
To estimate X, we choose MCL, a particle ﬁlter tailored for
localization over a map M known in advance. MCL represents
the belief on the estimated pose at time t as a set of particles
Xr
t , r = 1 . . . N. For initialization, we assume a uniform dis-
tribution on an interval for values of x, y and s and uniform
distribution over all values of heading for φ. When an odom-
etry measurement is available, a new pose for each particle is
sampled in accordance with the distribution of the odometry
[p.3]
10234
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 4, OCTOBER 2022
measurement. A separate observation It of the environment
acquired in the new pose is then used to update the weight of each
particle. The weight wr of particle r is wr = P(Xr
t |It, M), i.e.,
the likelihood that the pose Xr
t represents the true pose, given
observation It and map M. The likelihood is estimated based on
a similarity measure as described in the following section. This
weight is used when resampling a new representative particle set.
We follow the particle ﬁlter algorithm and low variance sampler
described in [3] and resample after each update.
B. Similarity Scoring Function Structure
Given a map M, an observation by the UAV, It, and a pose
hypothesis Xr
t , we ﬁrst perform an orthoprojection of the UAV
image with the method presented in earlier work [26]. The
orthoprojection method in [26] performs VIO and estimates the
position of tracked VIO features (landmarks) with respect to
drone coordinate frame in meters, assuming sufﬁcient excitation
on inertial measurements to resolve scale [27]. By assuming the
ground beneath the UAV is planar, the parameters of a plane
that best ﬁts the landmark coordinates are resolved and the UAV
image is projected to a top-down view by planar homography.
This allows creating a projection of the UAV image at a desired
resolution (1 m/px in our case) independent of UAV altitude.
To tolerate slight drift in estimated scale, our state estimator
includes the scale parameter.
FromtheorthoprojectedUAVimage, weﬁndthecorner points
of a square 96 × 96 m area (1 m/pixel) close to nadir view
that is fully visible in the UAV image. Given these corner point
locations, we compute what are the corresponding points on
the map, if pose hypothesis Xr
t was correct. We then crop a
square image patch from both the map M and the UAV image
It. We denote these image patches IM,Xr
t and It, respectively.
Examples are visualized in Fig. 9.
These image patches are used to compute a similarity score
cr
t, for each pose hypothesis indexed by r at time t, using a
similarity function f:
cr
t = f(IM,Xr
t , It)
(2)
To learn f, we propose an image comparison CNN architec-
ture inspired by [28]. The model structure is shown in Fig. 2. The
model contains two Siamese network branches and a separate
decision network1. The model takes as input the pair of images
(It, IM,X) and it produces a similarity measure c ∈[0, 1].
C. Data
To train the model, we use satellite images from datasets
released in [24] and collect additional data from Google Earth
historical images to include seasonal variation.
There are a total of 18 different areas with 3 to 15 satellite im-
ages acquired per area. For each area, we deﬁne a grid of possible
sampling locations. For each location, per each epoch, we select
one random satellite image from that area, crop a 96 × 96 m
area with random yaw and small random translation around grid
1Trained model and instructions for downloading training data available at
https://irobotics.aalto.ﬁ/sivl
Fig. 2.
Model structure for the image similarity network c = f(IM,X, It).
Branches share parameters.
point, and label that sample anchor. We also generate another
sample using the same crop parameters but from another image
of the same area, which we label the positive sample. A third,
negative sample is generated by selecting a random location and
orientation within the same area. The training dataset consists of
21870 unique locations for sampling, the testing dataset contains
1392 locations, and the weighing function estimation dataset has
5568 locations.
We perform various augmentations during training using [29].
We apply random ﬂips and transposes on the data, to generate
more data. We also apply Gaussian noise, various means of blur,
sharpening, emboss, brightness, contrast and color changes to
gain additional robustness to illumination changes and imaging
noise. Additionally, to provide robustness against orthoprojec-
tion errors, we apply small geometric transformations.
In training, we use binary cross-entropy loss, setting target to
1 for the pair of anchor and positive samples, and to 0 for the
pair of anchor and negative samples. The model is trained using
Adam optimizer with learning rate 10−5 and a weight decay of
10−8 for 1000 epochs.
D. Computing Importance Factor From Similarity Measure
We want to calculate the importance factor wr
t for each
particle r at time t to incorporate the camera observation in
the particle set. We compute the importance factor as wt
r =
P(Xr
t |It, M) = p(S = s|cr
t), where S = {s, u, o} is a variable
that determines if the measurement was a match (S = s), not
a match (S = u), or an outlier (S = o), and cr
t is determined
by (2). We assume p(o) = β where β = 0.05. As we resample
after each update, we assume uninformed priors p(s) = p(u) =
(1 −β)/2. We calculate the importance factor as
p(s|cr
t) =
p(c|s)p(s)

i∈{s,u,o} p(c|i)p(i)
(3)
To compute (3), we estimate the probability density func-
tion (pdf) p(c|s) from samples corresponding with true pose,
using Gaussian kernel density estimation with Scott’s bandwidth
[p.4]
KINNARI et al.: SEASON-INVARIANT GNSS-DENIED VISUAL LOCALIZATION FOR UAVS
10235
Fig. 3.
Histograms of similarity measures and estimated probability densities.
rule [30]. Similarly, we estimate a pdf corresponding with in-
correct pose p(c|u) for a number of randomly drawn poses. To
collectsamplescorrespondingwithtruepose(S = s),weextract
pairs of subimages from satellite images corresponding with
sameareainasimilar wayas inSectionIII-Candcomputevalues
of c for each pair from (2). To collect samples corresponding
with false pose (S = u), we extract pairs of subimages from
non-corresponding locations. In estimating p(c|s) and p(c|u),
we use satellite images from areas that were not used in training
f. A histogram of similarity scores for the two classes and
corresponding probability density functions are visualized in
Fig. 3. The outlier class pdf p(c|o) is assumed to be uniform
over the value range of c. The outlier class is included in order
to avoid overly conﬁdent classiﬁcations in regions of c where
very small amount of data is available.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
We test the accuracy of the proposed localization system,
using a learned similarity score, in two experiments.
In the ﬁrst experiment (Section IV-B) we want to evaluate the
seasonal invariance of the proposed solution. To this end, we
test the ability of the model to localize through simulated ﬂights
over urban and non-urban locations in our dataset under both
signiﬁcant appearance changes (i.e., winter imagery against a
map acquired in summer) as well as minor appearance changes
(i.e., summer imagery against a map acquired in the summer
but taken at a different time). We compare the localization
performance using our similarity measure method to six other
similarity measures.
The second experiment (Section IV-C) attempts to identify
how the proposed localization solution works on real UAV data,
which include a perspective change as well.
A. Experimental Setting
1) Prior on Initial Pose: In each experiment, the MCL ﬁlter
is initialized with 1000 particles in a 100 × 100 m area around
the true starting position, with scale 0.95 . . . 1.05 and with no a
priori information on yaw. This represents a situation where an
end user is able to state an inaccurate starting location for the
ﬂight of a UAV, without having to input information on initial
orientation.
2) Odometry Noise: In all experiments, the UAV takes a
sample image approximately every 100 meters. To simulate the
impact of odometry noise, we add normally distributed noise
with 2 m standard deviation in x and y translation and 1°
standard deviation in orientation with respect to the pose incre-
ment computed from ground-truth. These parameters are in line
Fig. 4.
Orthoimages used in simulated experiments as map (a), “summer” (b),
and “winter” (c) measurements. Each orthoimage is 4800 × 2987 m at 1 m/pixel
resolution.
with typical performance reported for monocular visual-inertial
odometry solutions in UAVs [31]. Scale noise is assumed to be
zero-mean Gaussian with a standard deviation of 0.001.
B. Localization Under Seasonal Appearance Variation
We tested the performance of the proposed localization
method under minor and signiﬁcant seasonal appearance change
in both urban and non-urban areas. We selected two testing
datasets, representing a non-urban and an urban area, respec-
tively, selected three orthoimages from each dataset (shown in
Fig. 4), and formulated an experiment where a simulated UAV
ﬂies above each area. One orthoimage acquired during summer
was used as map. Another orthoimage acquired during summer
was used for generating measurements for the minor seasonal
appearance case and one orthoimage acquired during winter was
used for generating measurements for the signiﬁcant seasonal
appearance case.
100 simulated ﬂights were executed for each combination
of minor/signiﬁcant seasonal appearance and urban/non-urban
area. In each run, the starting position and yaw of the simulated
UAV was randomly selected within the map. Motion of the UAV
was simulated with random changes in heading for a duration of
100updates,makingsurethetrajectorystayswithinthemap,and
localization performance of the MCL algorithm was quantiﬁed
by computing the weighted mean Euclidean distance to ground-
truth position in (x, y)-coordinates.
We compared the localization performance achieved using
the proposed method against six other map matching methods.
To compare with another learning-based method, we chose
Samano et al. [17] that has source code and learned weights
made available by the authors. To apply that approach to our
problem, instead of using a semantic map, unavailable in our
scenario, we leveraged their use of an intra-domain loss on UAV
images in training their embedding generator network and we
generated 16D embedding vectors from both IM,Xr
t and It using
their trained image feature extractor and projection modules.
We computed particle weights based on distance in embedding
space using the linear scaling method proposed by the authors.
Performance of deep learning matching methods has rarely been
evaluated in relation to more traditional metrics, which are still
ﬁnding practical use in real localization applications. For this
reason, we also compared against the matching method recently
proposed by Jureviˇcius et al. [20], using logistic conversion
with v = 0.2. As other classical image similarity measures, we
[p.5]
10236
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 4, OCTOBER 2022
Fig. 5.
Errors in simulated localization experiments when using different similarity measures, over different types of terrain. Minor appearance change refers to
summer-to-summer matching, while signiﬁcant refers to winter-to-summer matching. Medians of mean errors after 20 and 80 updates annotated.
used MI, which has gained attention in other UAV localization
approaches [21], [23] and is shown by Mantelli et al. [6] to
provide marginally superior success rate to abBRIEF. Another
classical similarity measure that we used as comparison is
Moravec, which we evaluated in a previous work [26].
In addition to Samano et al., Jureviˇcius et al., MI and our
previous approach, we also trained our model without any winter
imagery (called “Ours, w/o winter” in Fig. 5) to ablate what
we regard as the most important data augmentation source for
winter-summer localization. Finally, we trained an embedding
vector generator (called “Samano retrained” in Fig. 5) with
the model structure of [17] with the same data that we use
for our proposed method. The “Samano retrained” model is
trained using triplet loss, Adam optimizer, and learning rate 10−5
until the testing loss stopped improving (at approximately 200
epochs). For the “Samano retrained” model, we weighed the
particles using the linear scaling method in [17].
In our MI and Moravec implementations, we weighed the
particles by the Gaussian kernel density estimation method
described in Section III-D. Each algorithm was fed the same
odometry measurements and camera images, with the exception
that the camera image fed to Samano et al.’s network was scaled
to 128 × 128 pixels and it was taken from a 95 × 95 m area to
correspond with the design choices in [17]. Each algorithm also
used the same map.
Fig. 5 shows the median and 5...95% interval for weighted
mean errors computed over all 100 runs in all permutations
of urban/non-urban area type and minor/signiﬁcant appearance
change, using our method and the three comparison methods
for similarity score computation. The initial error increase in all
methods is due to no information on initial yaw. Once particles
representing false hypotheses for yaw die out, the error decreases
if the correct mode in the search space is found, i.e., if the ﬁlter
converges to the correct state.
Compared to the reference methods, our method provides
both faster convergence time and smaller error bounds after
convergence than all the comparison algorithms. In terms of
median of mean errors after convergence, Jureviˇcius appears to
provide lower median for localization error in the case of very
high texture (urban environment) and minor appearance change.
We suspect this difference may be due to data augmentation
by small geometric transformations that we used in training;
i.e., the network is trained to give high scores for slightly offset
pairs of images. Degradation of convergence and mean error
performance on our model trained without winter data show the
value of training on data that contains the expected variability.
The same can be seen in the comparison between Samano et al.
network and the retrained Samano model.
C. Localization on Real UAV Data
Besides the simulated experiments using orthoimages, we ran
an experiment with three datasets collected with a UAV2 to
identify performance gaps with our model trained on orthoimage
data only. The trajectories are shown on a map in Fig. 6 and
they cover forest areas, ﬁelds, residential areas, and a lake.
Ground-truth pose of the UAV in these experiments has been
obtained through RTK-GNSS which ensures precision in the
centimeter range. Additional characteristics of these ﬂights are
listed in Table I. The map used in these experiments was acquired
during summer, and the UAV ﬂights took place during autumn
months. In UAV dataset 1, deciduous trees are showing autumn
colorsandinUAVdatasets2and3,deciduoustreeshavedropped
leaves.
In this work, the images acquired by the UAV were ortho-
projected using ground-truth position information and a digital
elevationmodel(DEM)oftheenvironmentwheretheﬂighttakes
place, but in a ﬁnal use case, orthoprojection can be done e.g.,
using the method presented in earlier work [26] or by the use of
calibrated downward-facing camera and an altimeter. The choice
2Data provided by Saab Dynamics Ab.
[p.6]
KINNARI et al.: SEASON-INVARIANT GNSS-DENIED VISUAL LOCALIZATION FOR UAVS
10237
Fig. 6.
ground-truth real UAV trajectories. Starting location marked with green
star.
TABLE I
CHARACTERISTICS OF FLIGHTS IN EXPERIMENTS WITH REAL UAV DATA.
TRAJECTORY LENGTHS COMPUTED ALONG (x, y) PLANE, AND CAMERA
ANGLES BETWEEN NADIR AND CAMERA PRINCIPAL AXIS.
to use DEM was made to exclude the impact of possible errors
in elevation estimation. The DEM and the orthoimage map of
the areas for UAV experiments were purchased from a local map
information supplier3.
The weighted mean error in (x, y)-coordinates for all three
UAV ﬂights is visualized in Fig. 7. On all UAV datasets, solution
appears to converge after approximately 2 km of travel. The
mean errors after 2 km of travel for UAV datasets 1, 2 and 3 were
26.5 m, 29.1 m and 30.6 m, respectively. The localization error
and rate of convergence appears to mainly follow the conclu-
sions drawn from the orthoimage experiment. Interestingly, our
method without winter data appears to converge faster on dataset
1,possiblyduetobetterﬁtbetweentheenvironmentalconditions
of that particular ﬂight data and the training data. With our
method, time to convergence is longer than with the orthoimage
experiment. Mean error before convergence (at approximately
1...1.5 km of travel) appears to exceed the 5%...95% interval
estimatedwiththeorthoimageexperimentwithallUAVdatasets.
To better understand the performance of our similarity mea-
sure with the UAV datasets and understand the potential reason
for this performance gap, we computed the similarity measure
usingground-truthposeandplotteditforoneoftheUAVdatasets
in Fig. 8. For comparison, we also used the UAV image with ten
random false poses per image to generate negative examples, and
plotted their average similarity measure over the full trajectory.
With an ideal method, the true poses would always yield a
similarity measure very close to one, and the mean of random
poses would be close to zero. From Fig. 8 we see that similarity
measure appears to be least reliable over forest areas. This failure
3Lantmäteriet, https://www.lantmateriet.se/
Fig. 7.
Errors with different trajectories on real UAV data. Logarithmic vertical
scale.
Fig. 8.
Value of similarity measure computed (a) with true poses of UAV
dataset 3 and (b) as average of ten random poses per UAV frame, plotted over a
map.
mode appears in all of the UAV datasets and the geometric
distortion of tall trees as seen from the UAV compared to the
orthoview is a likely explanation to the initial difference in
localizationerrorperformancebetweentheUAVandorthoimage
experiments.
Manual visual inspection of similarity measures produced
by individual camera frames also leads to the remark that
when the UAV is ﬂying over a forest area where the density
of trees is such that trees appear geometrically very distorted
in the orthoprojection, similarity measure is often very low.
Three exemplary UAV images, corresponding map crops, and
similarity measure around true pose are visualized in Fig. 9.
Example 3 shows a case where geometric distortion of trees due
to orthoprojection appears to affect similarity score signiﬁcantly.
Conversely, in an environment with numerous spatially distinct
visual details such as buildings and roads (Fig. 9, Example 1),
the similarity measure shows a peak near the true state. The
width of the peak is approximately 40 m in translation error
and a few degrees in rotation error. Large width of the peak
in proportion to the locality of the visual details is possibly
affected by data augmentation, alignment errors of training
[p.7]
10238
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 7, NO. 4, OCTOBER 2022
Fig. 9.
Similarity measure produced by the learning model under rotation, translation and scaling near true pose in example UAV image frames and poses. (a) It
with outline of 96 m × 96 m square used for orthoprojecting It highlighted; (b) It; (c) IM,Xr
t (here visualized using true pose as Xr
t ); (d) true X (white plus sign)
and cropping square corresponding with Xr
t overlaid on map; (e) similarity measure value when translating around true pose (translation along map coordinate
axes); (f) and (g) similarity measure under rotations and scaling near true pose, respectively.
data, or both. The network also does not appear to have high
speciﬁcity; e.g., in Fig. 9, Example 1, adjacent intersections
appear to produce high scores. The importance of texture is
apparent also in Fig. 9, Example 2: there, for an image with
extremely few visual features (taken when ﬂying over a lake),
the model produces a valid matching score in vicinity of the
true state, but is unable to show a peaked output due to natural
ambiguity of the environment. In such cases, our solution falls
back to giving high likelihood for all particles corresponding
to ambiguous terrain area, in effect relying on odometry, until
unambiguous terrain areas are observed again.
Image patch extraction time is 0.33 s and inference time of
f is 0.13 s at each update on an Intel i7-9750H and NVidia
Quadro RTX 3000 using N = 1000 particles. We compute f in
batches of 100 image patches. Time consumption of both steps
scales linearly with N (e.g., for N = 10000, times are 3.3 s
and 1.3 s, respectively). As we perform an update every 100 m
of travel, time between updates is signiﬁcantly longer than the
computing time for typical ﬂight speeds of small UAVs. This
suggests the update can be run in real time, also on more resource
constrained platforms. We exclude the analysis of computational
requirements of VIO from this paper and refer the interested
reader to [31].
V. DISCUSSION
The experiments with orthoimages demonstrate that by using
a trained model for UAV image-to-map matching, signiﬁcant
reductions in convergence time and localization error can be
achieved, compared to reference methods, in cases of both mild
and signiﬁcant seasonal appearance change in urban and non-
urban environments.
The comparison to Pearson correlation-based approach [20]
and MI-based approach hints towards the interpretation that in
this task, trained models appear to outperform classical en-
gineered methods in both convergence time and localization
error, the only exceptions being the performance of [17] on
non-urban,signiﬁcantappearancechange,whichisconsiderably
out of training data domain in their solution, and the median
error after convergence of [20] in the urban, minor appearance
change case. In that one case, while [20] is able to achieve lower
median error at convergence, we still achieve lower range of
error across runs (i.e., narrower 5th–95th percentiles) and faster
convergence.
When looking at the comparison with the other learning
method [17], our method performs better across all experiments.
This can be partially explained by the fact that, in [17], the
authors have not speciﬁcally trained their embedding genera-
tor to be robust to signiﬁcant seasonal variance and they ap-
pear to focus on urban environments. This validates the need
for season-invariant methods for visual localization of UAVs.
However, also in the case of in-domain data for their method
(minor seasonal variation in urban environments), our method
still provides faster convergence and smaller error. This, to-
gether with the slightly better localization performance of our
model compared to the retrained Samano model, hints at the
possibility that our method may be a more suitable for this
task.
The experiments with UAV data show that the model trained
on orthoimages is able to localize also orthoprojected images
from a UAV camera. The experiments also demonstrate that
there is room for improvement on localization accuracy due
to geometric appearance change introduced by an off-nadir
viewpoint from a perspective camera.
Further
investigation
on
model
structure
and
dataset
composition may yield improved results. The model was not
trained speciﬁcally for a narrow peak of the output on correct
pose; considering the training method and model structure may
yield further improvements in localization, while incorporating
a portion of UAV data in the training dataset might make the
method more robust to perspective distortion.
[p.8]
KINNARI et al.: SEASON-INVARIANT GNSS-DENIED VISUAL LOCALIZATION FOR UAVS
10239
VI. CONCLUSION
We proposed a method for localizing a UAV with respect to
an orthophoto map, in case of signiﬁcant seasonal appearance
change, trained using only satellite images taken at different
times of year. We demonstrated the improvement in convergence
time and localization error compared to six reference methods
in simulated experiments involving signiﬁcant seasonal appear-
ance change. We showed the ability of the method to be used for
localization of a real UAV and identiﬁed the most likely error
sources for further development.
Our results demonstrate that we can build models that are ro-
bust to appearance changes due to seasonal variations. However,
seasons are only one source of variation for the dynamically
changing operation environments of autonomous agents. The
ability of agents to cope with all those variations will be crucial
for their deployment in practice.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Scaramuzza and Z. Zhang, “Aerial robots, visual-inertial odometry of,”
in Encyclopedia of Robotics. Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 2020,
pp. 1–9. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41610-
1_71-1
[2] C. Cadena et al., “Past, present, and future of simultaneous localization and
mapping: Toward the robust-perception age,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 32,
no. 6, pp. 1309–1332, Dec. 2016.
[3] S. Thrun, W. Burgard, and D. Fox, Probabilistic Robotics (Intelligent
Robotics and Autonomous Agents). Hoboken, NJ, USA: MIT Press, 2005.
[4] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints,”
Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 91–110, 2004.
[5] A. Cesetti, E. Frontoni, A. Mancini, A. Ascani, P. Zingaretti, and S.
Longhi, “A visual global positioning system for unmanned aerial vehicles
used in photogrammetric applications,” J. Intell. Robotic Syst., vol. 61,
pp. 157–168, 2011.
[6] M. Mantelli et al., “A novel measurement model based on abBRIEF for
global localization of a UAV over satellite images,” Robot. Auton. Syst.,
vol. 112, pp. 304–319, 2019.
[7] M. Calonder, V. Lepetit, C. Strecha, and P. Fua, “BRIEF: Binary robust
independent elementary features,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer, 2010, pp. 778–792.
[8] H. Hou et al., “UAV pose estimation in GNSS-denied environment as-
sisted by satellite imagery deep learning features,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 6358–6367, 2021.
[9] M. Dusmanu et al., “D2-Net: A trainable CNN for joint description and
detection of local features,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2019, pp. 8084–8093, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00828.
[10] E. Rublee, V. Rabaud, K. Konolige, and G. Bradski, “ORB: An efﬁcient
alternative to SIFT or SURF,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2011,
pp. 2564–2571.
[11] J. Choi and H. Myung, “Brm localization: UAV localization in GNSS-
denied environments based on matching of numerical map and UAV
images,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2020,
pp. 4537–4544.
[12] S. J. Dumble and P. Gibbens, “Airborne vision-aided navigation using road
intersection features,” J. Intell. Robotic Syst., vol. 78, pp. 185–204, 2015.
[13] A. Volkova and P. W. Gibbens, “More robust features for adaptive visual
navigation of UAV in mixed environments,” J. Intell. robotic Syst., vol. 90,
no. 1, pp. 171–187, 2018.
[14] M. Schleiss, “Translating aerial images into street-map-like representa-
tions for visual self-localization of UAV,” Int. Arch. Photogrammetry,
Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci., vol. 4213, pp. 575–580, 2019.
[15] A. Masselli, R. Hanten, and A. Zell, “Localization of unmanned aerial
vehicles using terrain classiﬁcation from aerial images,” in Intelligent
Autonomous Systems, E. Menegatti, N. Michael, K. Berns, and H. Yam-
aguchi, Eds., Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2016,
pp. 831–842.
[16] A. Nassar, K. Amer, R. ElHakim, and M. ElHelw, “A deep CNN-based
framework for enhanced aerial imagery registration with applications
to uav geolocalization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. Workshops, 2018, pp. 1594–159410.
[17] N. Samano, M. Zhou, and A. Calway, “Global aerial localisation using
image and map embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat.,
2021, pp. 5788–5794.
[18] A. Couturier and M. A. Akhlouﬁ, “Convolutional neural networks and
particle ﬁlter for UAV localization,” in Proc. Unmanned Syst. Technol.
XXIII, 2021, pp. 108–120. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1117/
12.2585986
[19] K. Pearson, “VII. Mathematical contributions to the theory of evolution
III. Regression, heredity, and panmixia,” Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. London.
Ser. A, vol. 187, pp. 253–318, 1896.
[20] R. Jureviˇcius, V. Marcinkeviˇcius, and J. Šeibokas, “Robust GNSS-denied
localization for UAV using particle ﬁlter and visual odometry,” Mach. Vis.
Appl., vol. 30, pp. 1181–1190, 2019.
[21] B. Patel, T. D. Barfoot, and A. P. Schoellig, “Visual localization with
google earth images for robust global pose estimation of uavs,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., 2020, pp. 6491–6497.
[22] M. Bianchi and T. D. Barfoot, “UAV localization using autoencoded
satellite images,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1761–1768,
Apr. 2021.
[23] A. Yol, B. Delabarre, A. Dame, J.-E. Dartois, and E. Marchand, “Vision-
based absolute localization for unmanned aerial vehicles,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2014, pp. 3429–3434.
[24] H. Goforth and S. Lucey, “Gps-denied UAV localization using pre-existing
satellite imagery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., 2019, pp. 2974–
2980.
[25] C. Masone and B. Caputo, “A survey on deep visual place recognition,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 19516–19547, 2021.
[26] J. Kinnari, F. Verdoja, and V. Kyrki, “Gnss-denied geolocalization of UAV
by visual matching of onboard camera images with orthophotos,” in Proc.
20th Int. Conf. Adv. Robot. (ICAR), 2021, pp. 555–562.
[27] A. Martinelli, “Vision and imu data fusion: Closed-form solutions for
attitude, speed, absolute scale, and bias determination,” IEEE Trans.
Robot., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 44–60, Feb. 2012.
[28] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Learning to compare image patches via
convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2015.
[29] A. Buslaev, A. Parinov, V. I. I. E. Khvedchenya, and A. A. Kalinin,
“Albumentations: Fast and ﬂexible image augmentations,” Information,
vol. 11, no. 2, 2018 Art. no. 125.
[30] D. W. Scott, Multivariate Density Estimation. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley,
1992.
[31] J. Delmerico and D. Scaramuzza, “A benchmark comparison of monocular
visual-inertial odometry algorithms for ﬂying robots,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Automat., 2018, pp. 2502–2509.
=== END ===
