warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0534.pdf
sha256: 3AD90C6D9A546D9280F331EB587512D4BF34AD4784C1FAA930B0E5BBF84C4253
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 7
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Integrated UWB-Vision Approach for Autonomous Docking
of UAVs in GPS-denied Environments
Thien-Minh Nguyen*, Thien Hoang Nguyen*, Muqing Cao*, Zhirong Qiu*, Lihua Xie⋆, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— Though
vision-based
techniques
have
become
quite popular for autonomous docking of Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs), due to limited ﬁeld of view (FOV), the UAV
must rely on other methods to detect and approach the target
before vision can be used. In this paper we propose a method
combining Ultra-wideband (UWB) ranging sensor with vision-
based techniques to achieve both autonomous approaching
and landing capabilities in GPS-denied environments. In the
approaching phase, a robust and efﬁcient recursive least-square
optimization algorithm is proposed to estimate the position of
the UAV relative to the target by using the distance and relative
displacement measurements. Using this estimate, UAV is able
to approach the target until the landing pad is detected by an
onboard vision system, then UWB measurements and vision-
derived poses are fused with onboard sensor of UAV to facilitate
an accurate landing maneuver. Real-world experiments are
conducted to demonstrate the efﬁciency of our method.
I. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous
docking
of
Unmanned
Aerial
Vehicles
(UAVs) has been an active research area over the past decade.
In general, it consists of two phases: an approaching phase
and a landing phase. Firstly, the UAV needs to locate and
navigate towards the target, which can be a landing track,
a manned or unmanned ground vehicle, possibly from some
distance up to a hundred meters away. Once the UAV is in
close proximity of the target, it will try to land in a predeﬁned
area. Conventionally, onboard vision systems are widely
employed to perform precise landing [1]–[8] due to their
ability to provide accurate positioning information. However,
while the landing problem can be considered mature by the
use of vision, it comes to our attention that the approaching
problem still lacks a good solution.
In many cases when GPS is available, the approaching ca-
pability can be achieved by simply communicating GPS data
between the UAV and the target. Recent works have showed
that by integrating GPS and vision data, the UAV can land on
a vehicle moving at 50 km/h [9], or a ﬁxed-wing UAV can
successfully dock onto a mid-air target [10]. However, this
method depends greatly on the availability and the quality
of GPS signals, and hence can only be applied in limited
scenarios. Speciﬁcally, it cannot be applied in city canyons,
forests, caves, or deep mines. Other methods have also been
proposed under GPS-denied conditions. For example, Kong
The authors are with School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798, 50 Nanyang Avenue.
∗These authors contributed equally to the work.
⋆Corresponding author: elhxie@e.ntu.edu.sg
A video summarizing the main concepts and experiment results of
this paper can be downloaded as supplementary media materials on
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org, or viewed directly at https://youtu.be/
qvDkEuIzzYs.
et. al. [11] proposed a method using a ground based stereo
camera to track and guide the UAV in the landing process.
Similarly, Gui et. al. [12] reversed the solution by having
the UAV carry the camera to detect infrared signals from
special lamps installed at the destination. It should be noted
that these works are only concerned with landing the UAV
on a static target, which require a long calibration process
and can be easily affected by background lighting conditions.
Also they do not entirely resolve the issue when the target
is out of the view of the UAV, or vice versa.
In this work, we consider the autonomous docking prob-
lem of UAVs onto a moving Unmanned Ground Vehicle
(UGV) from a long distance, by integrating Ultra-Wide
Band (UWB) and vision sensors to provide accurate and
reliable relative localization. Due to its omni-directional
sensing capability and strong resistance to multipath and
other inferences, UWB sensors are able to obtain high
ranging accuracy over long operation range (an error up to
10cm with maximum range up to 50 m is typical for the
sensor used in our case1), not to mention its communication
functionality. In our work, a set of UWB nodes are installed
on the UGV and the UAV, serving to measure the relative
distance and exchange information. In addition, both vehicles
are equipped with high-accuracy visual odometry systems
[13], [14] to collect displacement measurements, which are
transmitted through UWB message. By combining the dis-
tance and displacement measurements, we propose a relative
localization scheme based on recursive least square optimiza-
tion, and rigorously prove the exponential convergence to the
true relative position. Based on this relative position estimate,
the UAV is able to fulﬁll the approaching and landing tasks
from an initial large distance relative to the target. Extensive
outdoor ﬂight tests have been conducted to demonstrate that
the UAV can approach the moving UGV from 50m away
and then accurately land on a 1.5m×2m large platform.
In summary, the main contributions of our work can be
speciﬁed as follows:
• We design a relative localization scheme by using
distance measurements from sequential ranging to UWB
anchors and relative displacement measurements from
visual odometers. We then propose a recursive least
square algorithm to estimate the relative position to
the moving target, and show that the estimation error
converges to zero exponentially fast.
• Compared with our previous works on distance-based
docking with static targets [15]–[17], this work focuses
1http://www.timedomain.com/products/pulson-440/
2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
Palais des congres de Montreal, Montreal, Canada, May 20-24, 2019
978-1-5386-6027-0/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
9603
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
on the cooperative docking of a UAV on a moving
target, which achieves much higher ﬂexibility for the
docking task. Moreover, in those works no exponential
convergence was achieved.
• In the landing phase, we propose a method to fuse both
relative position estimate and range measurement to
ensure an accurate landing maneuver on a small moving
platform. We have conducted extensive indoor and
outdoor experiments to show the efﬁcacy and efﬁciency
of the integrated UWB-vision approach from a distance
up to 50m.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows: In
Section II, we describe the key deﬁnitions and an overview
of the integrated UWB-vision approach to solve the au-
tonomous docking problem with two specialized estimation-
control schemes for approaching and landing tasks. In Sec-
tion III, we present the relative localization scheme in details
along with a proof on its exponential convergence. Section
IV presents the results of our real ﬂight experiments with the
algorithm implemented in an autonomous docking scenario.
Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. OVERVIEW
A. Basic Deﬁnitions
In this section we will deﬁne some basic concepts needed
for later parts in direct reference to Fig. 1. First, we deﬁne
pk as the UAV position relative to the target with respect to
an inertial frame of reference FW . In this work we assume
that FW is aligned with the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld.
In our setup, multiple UWB nodes a0, a1, . . . , aN−1
(which also denote their coordinates in the mobile frame FM
ﬁxed on the UGV) are installed on the UGV and another
UWB node is also installed on the UAV. Henceforth, we
refer to the UWB nodes on the target as the anchors. Note
that the UAV node can only range to one anchor at a time
and the ranging scheme is executed in a periodic manner
as 0, 1, . . . , N −1, 0, 1... Henceforth, we will also use ak
to denote the coordinates of the anchor ai that is ranged to
at the time step k, where explicit speciﬁcation of index i is
glossed over to keep the notation simple (this detail is not
used in subsequent analysis). However, when needed, it can
be retrieved by the modulo operation i =
mod (k, N).
As illustrated in Fig. 1, at time kτ with τ being the
sampling time, the following measurements can be obtained:
for the UAV, it can measure the distance dk to only one of the
UWB nodes on the UGV, and its own displacement vector
φm
k since the last time step k −1 from a visual odometer;
for the UGV, it can measure its displacement vector φM
k and
the orientation RM
k with respect to FW using its own visual
inertial odometry system, and send them to the UAV.
In reference to Fig. 1, we also deﬁne um
k
=
1
τ φm
k ,
uM
k
= 1
τ φM
k
as average velocity of the UAV and the UGV
respectively from time steps k −1 and k. Similarly, we treat
the change from RM
k−1 to RM
k
as a rotation around an axis
ek from time steps k −1 to k with an average angular rate
ωk, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Fig. 1.
Visualization of the main concepts deﬁned in Section II-A.
Fig. 2.
Characterization of the rotation rate: between two time steps, the
frame FM rotates by an angle τωk around the axis ek. For a vector ai
that is ﬁxed in FM, its coordinates in the inertial frame FW at time steps
k −1 and k will be RM
k−1ai and RM
k ai, respectively. It can be seen that



RM
k ai −RM
k−1ai



 ≤2 ∥ai∥| sin(τωk/2)| ≤τ ∥ai∥|ωk|. The equality
occurs when ai is orthogonal to ek.
B. Estimation-Control Schemes
1) Approaching: In this section we will describe the
main ideas for accomplishing the approaching task in direct
reference to Fig. 3.
Firstly, the UAV will rely on an optical ﬂow as the main
feedback for stable ﬂight control. Note that this optical
ﬂow measurement is fused with IMU and other onboard
measurements in an onboard estimator based on Extended
Kalman Filter to obtain the displacement measurement φm
k .
Secondly, the target’s orientation RM
k
and displacement
measurement φM
k
(which is obtained from some navigation
system mounted on the target, e.g SLAM or visual-inertial
odometry) will be sent to the UAV via the same UWB
ranging message.
Finally, with the information dk, ak, φm
k , φM
k , RM
k , a re-
cursive least square optimization algorithm will be employed
to provide an estimate ˆpk of the relative position pk. Based on
this estimate, a velocity command vk is calculated and sent
to the onboard ﬂight controller to drive the UAV towards the
target. Speciﬁcally, vk is generated by the following simple
negative feedback control rule with saturation:
vk = ¯v/ max{¯v, Kp ∥ˆpk∥}(−Kpˆpk),
(1)
where ¯v > 0 is the maximum desired velocity and Kp > 0
is a constant gain.
9604
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
Fig. 3.
The estimation-control scheme in the approaching phase. See
Section II-B.1 for more details.
2) Landing: As the UAV approaches the platform and
the optical ﬂow may become unreliable (we found that
normal asphalt surface yields more accurate displacement
measurement than the landing pad’s black and white surface),
we will switch to a different estimate-control scheme for
more efﬁcient and accurate landing. Speciﬁcally, upon the
ﬁrst detection of the visual marker, we will transition to the
landing phase where optical ﬂow data is disabled, then both
vision and UWB measurements are fused with IMU data in
the onboard estimator to facilitate a position-based control
rule, which is detailed below.
As seen from Fig. 4, we use the position qk of the UAV
with respect to the target’s body frame FM as the new source
of feedback in place of the optical ﬂow. After retrieving qk
from visual tracking information, we can obtain RM
k qk as an
observation of the relative position pk, and fuse it into the
onboard estimator to generate the relative position estimate
¯pk. Moreover, to make up for temporary losses of vision, we
also fuse distance measurement into the onboard estimator
by invoking the observation model dk =


¯pk −RM
k ak


 in
the same manner with the EKF-based fusion scheme in [18].
Finally, using the onboard estimator estimate ¯pk of the
relative position pk, the ﬂight control unit can drive the UAV
to the center of the target. We impose that the UAV will only
descend when ¯pk is within a proximity of the center and
automatically cut off the throttle when the altitude is bellow
a threshold.
III. RELATIVE LOCALIZATION ALGORITHM
In this section we will discuss the derivation of the
recursive least-square estimation algorithm along with the
theoretical analysis of the convergence.
First, some standard assumptions will be stated.
A. Assumptions
To ensure a unique solution for later cost function, it is
necessary that there are sufﬁcient anchors whose coordinates
are linearly independent. In other words, the anchors must
Fig. 4.
The estimation-control scheme in the landing phase. See Section
II-B.2 for more details.
not be co-linear in 2D case, or co-planar in 3D case, which
is more formally stated as follows:
Assumption 1. For pk ∈Rn, n ∈{2, 3}, there exist k1, . . .
kn ∈{1, 2, . . . N} such that rank[bk1 . . . bkn] = n, where
bki ≜aki −aki−1 and aN ≡a0.
Since both UAV and UGV are physical systems, we also
assume that the average relative velocity uk = um
k −uM
k and
the target’s rotation rate ωk are all bounded (indeed, these
constraints can also be enforced via some control law with
saturation as in (1)):
Assumption 2. There exist positive constants U and Ωsuch
that ∥uk∥≤U and |ωk| ≤Ωfor all k.
B. Parametric model
Notations: in this section we will denote RM
k
as Rk to
simplify the notation. Also, for a vector v, v′ denotes its
transpose and ∥v∥denotes its Euclidean norm.
By recalling the deﬁnitions deﬁned in Section II-A and
Fig. 1, we can verify the following relationship between pk
and the measurements dk, τ, uk, Rk and ak:
d2
k = (pk−1 + τuk −Rkak)′(pk−1 + τuk −Rkak),
(2)
d2
k−1 = (pk−1 −Rk−1ak−1)′(pk−1 −Rk−1ak−1).
(3)
Noticing that R′
kRk = I, one can expand the right hand
side of the previous equations and obtain the following
d2
k −d2
k−1 = τ 2 ∥uk∥2 + ∥ak∥2 −∥ak−1∥2 −2τu′
kRkak
+ 2(τuk −Rkak + Rk−1ak−1)′pk−1.
(4)
From this relationship, denote the following quantities
ζk = 1
2

d2
k −d2
k−1 −τ 2 ∥uk∥2 −∥ak∥2
+ ∥ak−1∥2 + 2τu′
kRkak

,
(5)
ϕk = τuk −Rkak + Rk−1ak−1.
(6)
Thus, by comparing (4), (5), and (6) we can obtain
ζk = ϕ′
kpk−1.
(7)
9605
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
C. Cost function and estimation update law
With the parametric model (7), let us deﬁne ˆpk as the
estimate of pk that minimizes the following cost function:
Jk = 1
2
k
X
i=1
βk−i(ζi −ϕ′
i(ˆpk −
k
X
j=i
τuj))2
+ 1
2βk(ˆpk −
k
X
j=1
τuj −ˆp0)′Γ−1
0 (ˆpk −
k
X
j=1
τuj −ˆp0),
(8)
where ˆp0 is the initial value of ˆpk, Γ0 is a positive deﬁnite
matrix, and β is a positive constant.
By solving ∂Jk/∂ˆpk = 0, we obtain the estimator of ˆpk
as follows:
ϵk = ζk −ϕ′
k ˆpk−1,
(9a)
Γk = 1
β

Γk−1 −Γk−1ϕkϕ′
kΓk−1
β + ϕ′
kΓk−1ϕk

,
(9b)
ˆpk = ˆpk−1 + τuk + Γkϕkϵk,
(9c)
where 0 < β < 1, Γk ∈Rn×n and Γ0 = γI with γ > 0.
Remark 1. The aforementioned cost function and algorithm
are inspired by the least-square based optimization technique
with the forgetting factor in the adaptive control literature
[19]. However this method is usually used to estimate an
unknown constant parameter θ that takes the place of pk in
(7). Here, the problem has been generalized to the case of a
time-varying parameter whose rate of change is measurable
through uk. Furthermore, compared with the gradient-based
method proposed in [15], [17], we make full use of all
historical data, which not only improves convergence rate,
but also robustness to outliers.
Remark 2. A 3D implementation of algorithm (9) requires
that the anchor nodes have variable heights relative to the
platform, which can be unnecessarily inconvenient in most
practical scenarios. To avoid this issue, we implement a 2D
version of algorithm (9) in our experiment by removinng
the vertical component from the distance measurement (since
UWB sensor only measures the distance between two points
in 3D space). More speciﬁcally, if we denote dU
k as the
distance directly measured by the UWB sensors, dL
k as the
altitude of the UAV relative to the ground as measured by
some altimeter sensors, and h as the height of the platform,
we can obtain
q
(dU
k )2 −(dL
k −h)2 as the ”horizontal”
distance to the anchor. This value can then be used as dk in
the calculations of algorithm (9).
D. Exponential Convergence
In this section, we will study the exponential convergence
of the relative localization algorithm under the condition that
the sampling time τ is sufﬁciently small:
τ <
g(B∗)
√n[U + (2N −1)aMΩ], ˆpk ∈Rn
(10)
where aM = max0≤i≤N−1 ∥ai∥, n, U and Ωare deﬁned
in Assumptions 1, 2. In the above, g(B) = σM(B) −
p
σ2
M(B) −σ2m(B) with σm(B) and σM(B) respectively
denoting the smallest and the largest singular values of
B, and B∗
= arg maxB∈B g(B), where B =

B
=
[bk1 . . . bkn] : k1 . . . kn ∈{1, 2, . . . N}}.
The exponential convergence theorem is stated as follows,
and the proof is deferred to Appendix:
Theorem 1. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Under condition
(10), there exist α1 > 0 and α2 > 0 such that ϕk satisﬁes
the persistent excitation (PE) condition as follows:
α1I ≤Φ(m) ≜
m+1
X
k=m
ϕkϕ′
k ≤α2I, ∀m ≥1.
(11)
As a consequence, the relative position estimate ˆpk will
converge to the true value pk exponentially fast under the
update law (9).
IV. EXPERIMENT
In this part we will ﬁrst describe our experiment setup then
present and comment on the main experimental results. Note
that the algorithm presented in Section III is implemented in
a 2D scenario as explained in Remark 2.
A. Experiment setup
Our system is implemented on a hexacopter frame
equipped with a PX4 Autopilot2 ﬂight controller computer,
which also provides IMU measurements. A down-facing
camera is mounted below the UAV to provide color images
with a resolution of 320 × 240 pixel at 60Hz, hosted by
an Intel NUC Core i7 Mini Computer. A laser range ﬁnder
is used to directly measure the relative altitude (we assume
that the platform’s elevation from the ground is insigniﬁcant).
Optical ﬂow sensor3 is used for velocity estimation. We refer
to our previous works [18], [20] for detailed description of
operation principle, advantages and limitations of UWB.
The landing platform is equipped with four UWB sensors
attached to four corners of a 2m×1.5m rectangule at the
same height level, one Qualcomm Snapdragon Flight board4
attached to one of the anchor facing forward to provide VI-
SLAM data, and one landing pad with markers on top. In this
work, we use a visual tracking technique based on AprilTag
2 [21] with a speciﬁcally designed pattern consisting of tags
with various sizes to keep the visual features within the
camera’s ﬁeld of view (FOV) at both far and close distances,
as shown in Fig. 5. As the UAV descends on the landing pad,
larger tags will eventually leave the camera’s FOV, while
smaller ones towards the centre become detectable. Despite
these considerations, we do not assume that the landing pad
is always within the camera’s FOV. Thus, visual position
from AprilTag, UWB range measurements, and inertial data
from the ﬂight controller’s IMU are fused together in the
landing phase to ensure continuing relative localization and
tracking for precise landing.
2http://px4.io
3https://docs.px4.io/en/sensor/px4flow.html
4https://developer.qualcomm.com/hardware/
qualcomm-flight
9606
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
Fig. 5. Experimental setup: four anchor nodes are mounted on a ﬂat mobile
platform. The ranging sequence from the UAV node (4) is indicated by the
number associated with each anchor in the ﬁgure (0-3). VI-SLAM node (5)
is attached to anchor node (0), with the camera facing forward.
B. Results and Analysis
Three sets of experiments are carried out to investigate the
performance of the system in different scenarios:
1) Static target: In the ﬁrst set of experiments, a total
of ﬁve ﬂight tests were carried out in an 6m×6m indoor
area with an overhead motion capture system to record the
positions of the target as well as the UAV for ground truth.
Due to the limited size of the testing area, we tested the
algorithm with a static platform. However, in each test, we
rotated the platform to a different direction before the UAV
started ﬂying. After this, the UAV was controlled manually
to take off and move around the target for some time to
record the relative position estimate at different directions.
Then, the autonomous mode was enabled and the UAV began
executing the aforementioned estimation-control schemes to
approach and land on the platform.
We collected the data of all ﬁve experiment results and
made some analyses. Table I shows the root mean square
(rms) and standard deviation (std) values of the relative
position error. Fig. 6 shows the relative position estimate
together with the ground truth of one ﬂight test. It can be seen
that the average error in the position estimate is around 20
cm, which is obviously adequate for the docking operation.
TABLE I
ROOT MEAN-SQUARE (RMS) ERROR AND STANDARD DEVIATION (STD)
OF RELATIVE POSITION ESTIMATES (UNIT: m).
Exp.
rms(˜pk,x)
rms(˜pk,y)
std(˜pk,x)
std(˜pk,y)
1
0.1348
0.2317
0.0956
0.1197
2
0.1677
0.1639
0.0976
0.1391
3
0.1561
0.1216
0.1198
0.0819
4
0.1717
0.0968
0.1349
0.0827
5
0.1685
0.0995
0.0619
0.0575
2) Moving target:
In the second set of experiments,
so called chasing experiments, ﬁve more ﬂight tests were
conducted in an outdoor environment. In these tests, the UAV
took off at some distance from the target and was switched
Fig. 6.
Relative position estimate and ground truth in an indoor experiment
(the vertical estimate is obtained directly from the laser’s range ﬁnder
measurement, hence we can see some small offset during the landing phase
at the end due to the height of the UGV relative to the ground).
to autonomous mode to chase after the moving platform. In
Fig. 7, we show the trajectories of both the target and the
UAV in one of these tests. Note that pM
k denotes the UGV’s
planar trajectory as measured by its visual odometry system.
Thus the UAV’s estimated trajectory can be visualized by
adding the relative position estimate ˆpk to pM
k .
Fig. 7.
Trajectories of the UAV and the target relative to the starting point
of the target. The starting point of each trajectory is marked by a solid
circle. A successful landing can be observed at the end of the trajectories
as they coincide.
As no ground truth is available in this outdoor scenario,
we use the distance measurement to represent the successful
pursuit and landing on the target of the UAV. Fig. 8 shows
the distance measurements to the four anchors on the target
in all ﬁve tests. It can be seen that from a far distance, as
the UAV successfully lands on the target, all of the distances
decrease to approximately 1.25m, which corresponds to a
landing spot at the center of the 2m×1.5m platform with 4
anchors at the corners.
3) Distant static target: In the ﬁnal set of experiments, to
validate the extent to which UAV can approach the platform,
we moved the UAV to a location that is 50 m from the
starting position. The platform was kept static in this case.
As can be seen in Fig. 9, all of the distances still decrease
to approximately 1.25 m, which veriﬁes the capability of the
UAV to approach and land on the target from about 50m
away. We are conﬁdent that the method can still work at a
much longer distance.
9607
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
Fig. 8.
Distances from the UAV to the 4 anchors as measured by UWB in the second set of experiments. From some starting position, all distances
reduce to 1.25 m in the end, which reﬂects the successful docking task.
Fig. 9.
Distances from the UAV to the 4 anchor as measured by UWB in the third set of experiments. From 50 m away, all distances reduce to 1.25 m
in the end, which reﬂects the successful docking task.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have developed a system to achieve
autonomous docking capability for a quadcopter using dis-
tance and displacement measurements. Our technique com-
plements the conventional vision-based landing techniques
with a ﬂexible relative localization scheme to allow the UAV
to approach the target without the use of any external posi-
tioning information. Real-world experiments were conducted
to demonstrate the efﬁcacy of the proposed scheme.
APPENDIX
PROOF OF THEOREM 1
We ﬁrstly note that Φ(m) = Pm+N−1
k=m
ϕkϕ′
k is a summa-
tion of ϕkϕ′
k over an interval N. Since ϕk = τuk −Rkak +
Rk−1ak−1 and ak takes value from a0 to aN−1 periodically,
it incurs no loss of generality to only show (10) for Φ(1).
Below we will show α1I ≤Φ(1) ≤α2I by two steps.
1) Φ(1) ≤α2I. Equivalently, we will show that there
exists α2 > 0 such that x′Φ(1)x ≤α2 for any unit vector
x. By recalling (6) it holds that
ϕk = R0bk + ck, k = 1, 2, . . . , N,
(12)
where bk = ak −ak−1 and ck = τuk + (R0 −Rk)ak +
(Rk−1 −R0)ak−1. By recalling Assumption 2 as well as
∥Rkai −Rk−1ai∥≤τ ∥ai∥|ωk| in Fig. 2, we get that
∥ck∥≤τU + τaMNΩ+ τaM(N −1)Ω
≤τ[U + (2N −1)aMΩ] ≜c(τ).
(13)
Direct computation shows that
x′Φ(1)x ≤PN
k=1(∥bk∥2 + 2 ∥ck∥∥bk∥2 + ∥ck∥2)
≤N(2aM + c(τ))2 ≜α2,
(14)
where we used ∥R′
0x∥= ∥x∥= 1, (13), and ∥bk∥≤2aM,
as well as the Cauchy-Swartz inequality. Thus Φ(1) ≤α2I.
2) Φ(1) ≥α1I. Equivalently, we will show that there
exists α1 > 0 such that x′Φ(1)x ≥α1 for any unit vector x.
Let us select bk1, . . . bkn satisfying Assumption 1, and denote
B = [bk1 . . . bkn]. We have Φ(1) ≥ϕk1ϕ′
k1 + · · · + ϕknϕ′
kn.
Direct computation shows that
x′Φ(1)x ≥∥x′R0B∥2 −2x′CB′R′
0x + ∥C′x∥2
≥σ2
m −2σM∥C′x∥+ ∥C′x∥2,
(15)
where σm and σM are respectively the smallest and the
largest singular values of B, and C = [ck1 . . . ckn]. Note
that σM ≥σm > 0 by Assumption 1. Clearly, it sufﬁces
to show that σ2
m −2σM∥C′x∥+ ∥C′x∥2 ≥α1 for some
α1 > 0. Noticing that ∥C′x∥≤√nc(τ), we can see
that if α1 < σ2
m, then the above can be achieved with
c(τ) ≤(σM −
p
σ2
M −σ2m)/√n. Taking B = B∗in (10),
we have shown that Φ(1) ≥α1I.
By combing 1) and 2) we obtain the PE condition of ϕk.
To study the convergence rate, let us denote ˜pk ≜ˆpk −pk
as the estimation error. By comparing (9a) and (7), we have
ϵk = −ϕ′
k ˜pk−1. By substituting this into (9c) and subtracting
both sides by pk, one has ˜pk = Ak ˜pk−1, where Ak ≜I −
Γkϕkϕ′
k. Combining with (9b), we can prove the exponential
convergence of ˜pk along a similar line as in the Theorem 1
of [22].
9608
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.7]
REFERENCES
[1] A. Gautam, P. Sujit, and S. Saripalli, “A survey of autonomous landing
techniques for uavs,” in Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), 2014
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1210–1218.
[2] S. Jin, J. Zhang, L. Shen, and T. Li, “On-board vision autonomous
landing techniques for quadrotor: A survey,” in Control Conference
(CCC), 2016 35th Chinese.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 10 284–10 289.
[3] R. Brockers, S. Susca, D. Zhu, and L. Matthies, “Fully self-contained
vision-aided navigation and landing of a micro air vehicle independent
from external sensor inputs,” in Unmanned Systems Technology XIV,
vol. 8387.
International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2012, p.
83870Q.
[4] S. Yang, S. A. Scherer, and A. Zell, “An onboard monocular vision
system for autonomous takeoff, hovering and landing of a micro aerial
vehicle,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, pp. 1–17, 2013.
[5] M. Laiacker, K. Kondak, M. Schwarzbach, and T. Muskardin, “Vision
aided automatic landing system for ﬁxed wing uav,” in Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 2971–2976.
[6] K. Ling, “Precision landing of a quadrotor uav on a moving target
using low-cost sensors,” Master’s thesis, University of Waterloo, 2014.
[7] K. E. Wenzel, A. Masselli, and A. Zell, “Automatic take off, tracking
and landing of a miniature uav on a moving carrier vehicle,” Journal
of intelligent & robotic systems, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 221–238, 2011.
[8] D. Falanga, A. Zanchettin, A. Simovic, J. Delmerico, and D. Scara-
muzza, “Vision-based autonomous quadrotor landing on a moving
platform,” in IEEE/RSJ International Symposium on Safety, Security
and Rescue Robotics (SSRR), no. EPFL-CONF-232507, 2017.
[9] A. Borowczyk, D.-T. Nguyen, A. Phu-Van Nguyen, D. Q. Nguyen,
D. Saussi´e, and J. Le Ny, “Autonomous landing of a multirotor micro
air vehicle on a high velocity ground vehicle,” IFAC-PapersOnLine,
vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 10 488–10 494, 2017.
[10] D. B. Wilson, A. G¨oktogan, and S. Sukkarieh, “Guidance and navi-
gation for uav airborne docking.” in Robotics: Science and Systems,
vol. 3, no. 3, 2015.
[11] W. Kong, D. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. Xian, and J. Zhang, “Autonomous
landing of an uav with a ground-based actuated infrared stereo vision
system,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2013 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 2963–2970.
[12] Y. Gui, P. Guo, H. Zhang, Z. Lei, X. Zhou, J. Du, and Q. Yu,
“Airborne vision-based navigation method for uav accuracy landing
using infrared lamps,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems,
vol. 72, no. 2, p. 197, 2013.
[13] G. Loianno, C. Brunner, G. McGrath, and V. Kumar, “Estimation,
control, and planning for aggressive ﬂight with a small quadrotor with
a single camera and imu,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 404–411, 2017.
[14] D. Honegger, L. Meier, P. Tanskanen, and M. Pollefeys, “An open
source and open hardware embedded metric optical ﬂow cmos camera
for indoor and outdoor applications,” in Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2013 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp.
1736–1741.
[15] T.-M. Nguyen, Z. Qiu, M. Cao, T. H. Nguyen, and L. Xie, “An
integrated localization-navigation scheme for distance-based docking
of uavs,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2018 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2018.
[16] ——, “Single landmark distance based navigation,” Submitted to IEEE
Transactions on Control Systems Technology, 2019.
[17] T. H. Nguyen, M. Cao, T.-M. Nguyen, and L. Xie, “Post-mission
autonomous return and precision landing of uav,” in 2018 15th
International Conference on Control, Automation, Robotics and Vision
(ICARCV).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1747–1752.
[18] T.-M. Nguyen, A. H. Zaini, C. Wang, G. Kexin, and L. Xie, “Ro-
bust Target-relative Localization with Ultra-wideband Ranging and
Communication,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2018 IEEE
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2018.
[19] P. Iannou and B. Fidan, Adaptive Control Tutorial.
Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics: Philadelphia, PA, 2006.
[20] T. M. Nguyen, A. H. Zaini, K. Guo, and L. Xie, “An ultra-wideband-
based multi-uav localization system in gps-denied environments,” in
2016 International Micro Air Vehicles Conference, 2016.
[21] J. Wang and E. Olson, “AprilTag 2: Efﬁcient and robust ﬁducial
detection,” in 2016 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, oct 2016, pp. 4193–4198.
[22] R. M. Johnstone, C. R. Johnson, R. R. Bitmead, and B. D. Anderson,
“Exponential convergence of recursive least squares with exponential
forgetting factor,” in Decision and Control, 1982 21st IEEE Confer-
ence on.
IEEE, 1982, pp. 994–997.
9609
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:17:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
