warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1163.pdf
sha256: 0D3D74F09E0C81F34BD3256D764AB169F925C1D40B31F960A2F96D647179BC1E
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 15
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Results in Engineering
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/results-in-engineering
Research paper
A comparative study of TERCOM-EKF and ViSensorRF for UAV localization 
in GNSS-denied environments 
Imen Jarraya
∗, Khaled Gabr
, Mohamed Abdelkader
, Fatimah Alahmed
, 
Muhammad Bilal Kadri
, Wadii Boulila
Robotics and Internet of Things Laboratory, Prince Sultan University, Riyadh, 12435, Saudi Arabia
a r t i c l e i n f o
Keywords:
UAV Localization
GNSS-Denied environments
Visual-inertial sensor fusion
Non-visual sensor fusion
Random forest regression
Extended Kalman ﬁlter
Digital elevation model
 
a b s t r a c t
Accurate localization is essential for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) in mission-critical applications such as 
military operations, search and rescue, and environmental monitoring. While Global Navigation Satellite Sys-
tems (GNSS) provide reliable positioning in open environments, GNSS-denied conditions remain challenging, 
such as in obstructed or hostile environments. Various localization strategies have been developed using visual 
and/or non-visual sensors such as LiDAR, barometers, Inertial Measurement Units (IMU), and cameras, with re-
cent advances in machine learning. However, there is a lack of comparative studies that analyze the trade-oﬀs 
between learning-based and conventional estimation approaches in such conditions. This study bridges that gap 
by comparing two fundamentally diﬀerent methods: a Terrain Contour Matching algorithm-Extended Kalman Fil-
ter framework (TERCOM-EKF), and Visual-Inertial Sensor Fusion with Random Forest Regression (ViSensorRF), 
a machine learning approach based on Random Forest Regression (RFR). Both methods are evaluated in a GNSS-
denied simulation environment using PX4, Robot Operating System (ROS) 2, Gazebo, and QGroundControl over 
a digital elevation model of the Taif region in Saudi Arabia. Results demonstrate that ViSensorRF achieves su-
perior localization accuracy, with a root mean square error (RMSE) ranging between approximately 1 to 5 m 
across multiple trajectories, but requires signiﬁcantly higher execution time of 1.92 s. In contrast, TERCOM-EKF 
oﬀers faster computation of 0.04 s, making it suitable for real-time deployment in resource-constrained UAV sys-
tems. These ﬁndings highlight a trade-oﬀ between localization precision and computational eﬃciency, oﬀering 
valuable insights for UAV deployment in GNSS-denied environments.
1.  Introduction
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have become indispensable plat-
forms across civilian and defense domains, supporting a wide range of 
autonomous missions such as infrastructure inspection, precision agri-
culture, environmental surveillance, disaster response, and scientiﬁc
exploration [1,2]. The rapid evolution of onboard sensing, communi-
cation, and control technologies has signiﬁcantly expanded UAV opera-
tional capabilities, enabling greater levels of autonomy and situational 
awareness. As autonomy continues to advance, the requirement for
accurate, reliable, and resilient localization has become increasingly 
critical, especially in complex environments where Global Navigation 
Satellite System (GNSS) signals are degraded, obstructed, or entirely un-
available [3,4].
Traditionally, UAVs determine their position, velocity, and orien-
tation using GNSS, including Global Positioning System(GPS), Galileo, 
∗Corresponding author.
 
E-mail addresses: ijarraya@psu.edu.sa (I. Jarraya), khammad@psu.edu.sa (K. Gabr), mabdelkader@psu.edu.sa (M. Abdelkader), falahmed@psu.edu.sa (F. 
Alahmed), mkadri@psu.edu.sa (M.B. Kadri), wboulila@psu.edu.sa (W. Boulila).
GLONASS, and BeiDou, which provide global coverage and centimeter-
level accuracy under ideal conditions. While GNSS oﬀers reliable perfor-
mance in open-sky environments, its applicability is signiﬁcantly con-
strained in complex environments such as forests, tunnels, underground 
environments, and high security zones. Moreover, intentional interfer-
ence methods such as jamming and spooﬁng have raised growing con-
cerns about the reliability of GNSS-dependent navigation, particularly 
in mission-critical or adversarial environments [5,6].
Although high precision GNSS modules and open-source real-time 
kinematic (RTK) processing tools such as RTKLIB and u-blox F9P have 
improved positioning accuracy [7–9], they remain susceptible to the 
same environmental and security limitations. This growing vulnerabil-
ity has led to a surge of research eﬀorts focused on developing GNSS-
independent localization methods. These strategies leverage onboard 
sensors, digital maps, and artiﬁcial intelligence techniques to improve 
resilience and ensure continuity of navigation.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rineng.2025.108279
Received 20 August 2025; Received in revised form 4 November 2025; Accepted 17 November 2025
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
Available online 28 November 2025 
2590-1230/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 
[p.2]
I. Jarraya et al.
Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) form the backbone of dead reck-
oning navigation systems for UAVs because of their high update rate 
and independence from external positioning signals. An IMU typically 
consists of three orthogonally mounted accelerometers and three gyro-
scopes that measure speciﬁc force and angular rate, respectively. These 
measurements are integrated over time to estimate velocity, attitude, 
and position, forming the core of strapdown inertial navigation sys-
tems (INS). However, in cost-eﬀective Micro-Electro-Mechanical Sys-
tems (MEMS) based IMUs, error accumulation including bias drift, scale 
factor instability, and random noise progressively degrades positional 
accuracy during extended GNSS-denied ﬂights [10,11]. MEMS sensors 
operate by detecting minute displacements of microfabricated mechan-
ical elements using capacitive, piezoelectric, or tunneling-based sensing 
principles. While these devices are compact, lightweight, and energy ef-
ﬁcient, they are aﬀected by thermal variations, mechanical vibration, 
and long-term bias instability. The resulting inertial errors propagate 
through integration, causing velocity errors that grow linearly and po-
sition errors that grow quadratically with time. For example, a small 
gyroscope bias of 0.01 deg/s can lead to several meters of position error 
after only a few minutes of ﬂight.
Recent work by Xuan et al. (2024) reviewed advances in MEMS IMU 
array technology and emphasized that even with advanced calibration 
techniques and stochastic modeling, zero-bias drift remains a critical 
limitation for accurate long-term navigation in GNSS-denied environ-
ments [12]. To mitigate these limitations, modern UAV systems apply 
bias estimation and correction through ﬁltering algorithms such as the 
Extended Kalman Filter (EKF), the Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF), and 
the Error-State Kalman Filter (ESKF). These ﬁlters use dynamic pro-
cess models to estimate and remove bias components from IMU mea-
surements in real time, thereby improving stability and reducing drift. 
Complementary sensors such as barometers, radar altimeters, ultrasonic 
range ﬁnders, and LiDAR units are also integrated to provide redun-
dant observations and enhance positioning robustness [13–15]. By fus-
ing these auxiliary measurements with inertial data, the navigation sys-
tem constrains IMU drift and maintains accurate positioning over long 
durations, even in the absence of GNSS signals.
Visual sensors including RGB, stereo, and depth cameras provide 
additional spatial awareness through techniques such as Simultaneous 
Localization and Mapping (SLAM), visual odometry (VO), and feature-
based landmark tracking. Stereo cameras compute disparity maps to es-
timate depth, while time-of-ﬂight and structured-light cameras directly 
measure distance, generating dense three-dimensional point clouds that 
assist in surface reconstruction and obstacle detection. Despite these ca-
pabilities, vision-based systems remain sensitive to environmental con-
ditions such as low illumination, repetitive texture, and motion blur, 
which can impair feature extraction and tracking [16]. Moreover, high-
altitude ﬂights or homogeneous terrain surfaces reduce visual parallax, 
creating scale ambiguity and reducing pose estimation accuracy.
To overcome the limitations of individual sensing modalities, re-
cent research emphasizes the integration of visual, inertial, and range-
based sensor data combined with machine learning (ML) frameworks 
to enhance adaptability and performance in GNSS-denied environments 
[17,18].Hybrid sensor fusion architectures exploit the complementary 
strengths of each modality: inertial sensors provide high-frequency mo-
tion updates, visual systems deliver global spatial constraints, and Li-
DAR data contribute absolute range and terrain structure information. 
ML models such as Random Forest Regression (RFR), Convolutional 
Neural Networks (CNNs), and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) net-
works have shown strong capabilities in learning nonlinear depen-
dencies between multi-sensor observations and corresponding motion 
states, thereby improving accuracy and stability under dynamic and vi-
sually degraded conditions [19,20].
Geospatial datasets such as Digital Elevation Models (DEMs), Digi-
tal Surface Models (DSMs), and Digital Terrain Models (DTMs) play an 
increasingly important role in terrain-aided navigation [21]. DEMs rep-
resent the Earth’s topographic surface, including all natural and man-
made features, DSMs capture the uppermost surfaces such as vegetation 
and buildings, and DTMs model the bare terrain after removing surface 
objects. These datasets, processed using QGIS, Blender, or other GIS-
integrated simulation platforms, are fused with onboard sensor data to 
create accurate terrain-aware localization frameworks. By correlating 
real-time LiDAR or barometric altitude data with preloaded DEM or 
DTM maps, UAVs can estimate their horizontal displacement through 
terrain correlation, enhancing localization accuracy and ensuring navi-
gation continuity in GNSS-denied conditions.
This work presents a comparative analysis of UAV localization strate-
gies adapted for GNSS-denied environments. The ﬁrst method, referred 
to as TERCOM-EKF, is a Terrain Contour Matching algorithm-Extended 
Kalman Filter framework that correlates onboard altitude measurements 
with preloaded DEMs using an EKF. This method integrates LiDAR, baro-
metric, and inertial sensor data to estimate UAV position relative to 
known terrain features. The second method, ViSensorRF, a visual-inertial 
sensor fusion with RFR, employs a data-driven fusion framework that 
combines visual and non-visual sensors used in the previous method to 
estimate global position using an RFR model trained on multi-sensor ob-
servations. Unlike previous studies that evaluate single-method localiza-
tion systems, this work uniquely integrates and compares both classical 
estimation and modern machine learning-based approaches under iden-
tical GNSS-denied conditions. The contribution lies in analyzing how 
learning methods perform relative to terrain-aided ﬁltering, thereby re-
vealing the trade-oﬀs between computational eﬃciency and localiza-
tion accuracy in UAV scenarios. The main objective of this research is 
to develop and evaluate robust, data-driven, and model-based localiza-
tion strategies that can ensure reliable UAV navigation in GNSS-denied 
environments. To achieve this goal, the study investigates the comple-
mentary roles of traditional terrain correlation and machine learning-
based sensor fusion using synthetic datasets that replicate real-world 
ﬂight conditions. The principal contributions of this work are summa-
rized as follows:
• We conduct a comparative analysis between a traditional terrain-
aided localization approach (TERCOM-EKF) and a learning-based 
sensor fusion method (ViSensorRF) under GNSS-denied conditions.
• We design and generate high-ﬁdelity synthetic datasets using ROS 2, 
PX4, Gazebo, and QGroundControl, simulating UAV operations over 
realistic terrain models of the Taif region in Saudi Arabia.
• We perform extensive evaluations based on root-mean-square error 
(RMSE) and execution time, highlighting key trade-oﬀs between lo-
calization precision and computational eﬃciency. We also compare 
its performance against other methods, including Fast LiDAR-inertial 
odometry (Fast-LIO), the Multisensor-aided Inertial Navigation Sys-
tem (MINS), and a machine learning-based approach, eXtreme Gra-
dient Boosting (XGBoost).
• We provide practical insights into the applicability of conventional 
map-based versus machine-learning-based methods for real-time, 
resource-constrained UAV systems.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews 
related localization techniques and their performance benchmarks.
Section 3 details the localization strategies. Section 4 presents and dis-
cusses the experimental results. Section 5 illustrates the conclusion and 
future directions.
2.  Related works
Robust localization for UAVs in GNSS-denied environments has 
emerged as a critical area of research as UAVs are increasingly used 
in defense, emergency response, infrastructure monitoring, and indus-
trial automation. Alternative positioning strategies have been proposed 
as GNSS signals are often unreliable in obstructed or hostile environ-
ments, such as urban canyons, tunnels, forests, or areas subject to jam-
ming. These can be broadly categorized into (i) visual-based methods, 
(ii) non-visual sensor approaches, and (iii) hybrid multi-sensor fusion 
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
2 
[p.3]
I. Jarraya et al.
frameworks, with an increasing trend toward machine learning and ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence integration. For example, Munguia et al. [22] intro-
duced a vision-based Simultaneous Control, Localization, and Mapping 
(SCLAM) system that tightly integrates monocular SLAM with hierar-
chical control modules to enable autonomous exploration and return-
to-home in GPS-denied environments. Table 1 describes the proposed
solutions, the sensors used, and the results of recent studies. This com-
parative summary highlights the evolution of UAV localization technolo-
gies, from hand-crafted feature matching to deep learning and hybrid 
fusion models, each tailored to speciﬁc environmental or mission con-
straints.
2.1.  Vision-only localization
Visual-only approaches rely on onboard cameras to estimate UAV po-
sitions by matching captured imagery with satellite or aerial references. 
For example, Wang et al. [18] proposed a deep sequence-based match-
ing pipeline that boosts visual UAV-to-satellite geolocalisation, achiev-
ing Recall@5 of 99 % on the ALTO and NewYorkFly datasets. Gao et al. 
[23] improved accuracy by integrating the SuperPoint and SuperGlue 
descriptors with RANSAC, obtaining a mean error of 0.356 m.
Specialized strategies for terrain-aided or extraterrestrial navigation 
have also emerged [24]. Wan et al. [25] applied terrain-aided SLAM 
via frequency domain matching, achieving a 0.45-meter error across a 
33.8 km trajectory.
Visual-only systems are vulnerable to failure in low-texture, poorly 
lit, or repetitive-pattern environments and depend heavily on the avail-
ability and quality of reference maps. To improve robustness under vari-
able conditions, Yao et al. [26] introduced a drift-free visual localization 
framework. It combines image matching, visual odometry, and terrain-
weighted optimization and demonstrates robustness even during night-
time operations without requiring downward-facing cameras, altime-
ters, or IMUs.
2.2.  Hybrid multi-sensor fusion
To address the limitations of vision-based systems, recent research 
has combined visual inputs with data from IMUs, LiDAR, barometers, 
and radar altimeters. Gupta et al. [27] highlighted that accurate sensor 
calibration is necessary to ensure reliable UAV orientation and position 
estimation. Kinnari et al. [28] introduced LSVL, a visual localization 
method that uses season-invariant descriptors derived from both visual 
and non-visual sensors. Similarly, Lee et al. [29] developed a georef-
erenced localization framework that fuses aerial scene matching with 
INS, and barometric data via an EKF, achieving 1.4 pixels accuracy over 
mountainous trajectories and demonstrating robust UAV localization in 
GNSS-denied environments. Zhou et al. [30] developed a multi-level vi-
sual localization framework for low-altitude UAVs that combines image 
retrieval with image registration, enhanced by IMU-based adjustments 
and sliding-window map updates, enabling precise and reliable naviga-
tion in GNSS-denied conditions.
2.3.  Non-visual localization
Cui et al. [31] proposed a non-visual alternative using a mechanical 
antenna to emit low-frequency magnetic signals. This enables robust 
UAV positioning without reliance on lighting or high processing power. 
However, it requires a base station and has a limited coverage area. Jar-
raya et al. [32] analyzed several ﬁltering strategies and Recursive Least 
Squares, within a terrain-matching framework, and introduced a UKF-
based method enhanced by a k-dimensional(KD) Tree. This approach 
achieved markedly higher precision, cutting RMSE by 84.6 % compared 
to the conventional Terrain Contour Matching (TERCOM) algorithm.
Recent advances have introduced learning-based sensor fusion 
strategies that leverage neural networks to infer UAV positions from 
heterogeneous sensor streams. For instance, Wang et al. [33] proposed 
a hybrid Self-Attention Long Short-Term Memory (SALSTM) network 
that fuses IMU, barometer, magnetometer, and airspeed data to estimate 
UAV velocity and attitude during GNSS outages. The network outputs 
are integrated within an EKF to improve localization accuracy. How-
ever, the eﬀectiveness of the approach inherently relies on the accuracy 
of the sensor measurements, particularly from low-cost MEMS sensors. 
Roux et al. [19] used LSTM networks to fuse temporal data from mul-
tiple sensors, improving tracking in dynamic scenes. El Sabbagh et al. 
[34] developed a cascaded model using a non-linear autoregressive neu-
ral network with exogenous inputs and feedforward neural networks to 
estimate navigation errors during GNSS outages. Ahmed et al. [35] in-
tegrated frequency modulated continuous wave (FMCW) radar into an 
EKF and Particle Filter framework, achieving a 99.89 % reduction in 
drift error during GNSS loss, validated in real terrain.
In multi-agent contexts, Bodi et al. [36] proposed a LiDAR-based for-
mation control framework that integrates k-means clustering for relative 
localization and reinforcement learning for robust formation control, 
without relying on maps or GNSS.
2.4.  Contribution
Despite the breadth of recent advancements, a comparative analy-
sis of fundamentally distinct localization paradigms, such as terrain-
referenced estimation versus learning-based sensor fusion, remains
underexplored. This study bridges that gap by analyzing two funda-
mentally diﬀerent strategies for UAV localization in GNSS-denied en-
vironments. The TERCOM-EKF method applies terrain-referenced esti-
mation by correlating onboard sensor data with DEMs using an EKF. In 
contrast, the ViSensorRF framework employs a machine learning model 
that integrates visual and inertial sensor data through RFR to estimate 
global position. Leveraging high-ﬁdelity synthetic datasets generated 
using ROS 2, PX4, Gazebo, QGroundControl, QGIS, and Blender, this 
work provides an in-depth evaluation of the strengths, limitations, and 
trade-oﬀs between map-based estimation and learning-based sensor fu-
sion under degraded navigation conditions. In addition, we conduct an 
extensive comparative study using the same dataset against established 
methods, including Fast-LIO, MINS, and XGBoost, to benchmark the per-
formance.
3.  UAV Localization methods in GNSS-denied environments
This section introduces two divergent localization strategies evalu-
ated for their eﬀectiveness in estimating UAV position without GNSS. 
Rather than relying on satellite signals, both methods exploit onboard 
sensor data to infer global coordinates (latitude and longitude). As illus-
trated in Fig. 1, the two approaches reﬂect distinct design philosophies: 
one grounded in map-based correlation, the other in multi-modal data-
driven inference.
The TERCOM-EKF approach applies a terrain-referenced estimation 
framework that matches observed elevation proﬁles with preloaded 
DEMs. It integrates barometric, LiDAR, and IMUs within an EKF to main-
tain spatial coherence. This strategy is particularly suited for environ-
ments with diverse terrain features and accurate prior mapping data. In 
contrast, ViSensorRF adopts a machine learning paradigm by employ-
ing RFR to learn spatial patterns from multi-sensor observations. This 
method fuses visual imagery with inertial and environmental data to es-
timate geospatial coordinates. Unlike deterministic ﬁltering techniques, 
it leverages data distributions captured during training, enabling ﬂexi-
ble adaptation to heterogeneous or visually structured environments.
3.1.  Terrain contour matching-extended Kalman ﬁlter
The TERCOM-EKF framework integrates terrain-based referencing 
with recursive probabilistic estimation to localize UAVs operating in 
GNSS-denied environments. By correlating real-time onboard altitude 
measurements with preloaded DEM data, the system generates reﬁned 
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
3 
[p.4]
I. Jarraya et al.
Table 1 
Summary of localization methods based on sensor type, results, and method name.
Reference
Sensors
Key Results
Method
 Visual-only
Yao et al. [26]
Camera
MAE𝑥,𝑦,𝑧 = (6.7, 8.1, 6.9) m; 
RMSE𝑥,𝑦,𝑧 = (9.8, 12.2, 10.1) m
Image matching, visual odometry, 
terrain-weighted constraint optimization
Gao et al. [23]
Camera
Mean error = 0.356 m
SuperPoint + SuperGlue with RANSAC
Wang et al. [18]
Camera, satellite images
R@5 = 99.99 %, AP = 89.92 %
Coarse-to-ﬁne sequence matching
Wan et al. [25]
DEM, Camera
RMSE𝑝𝑜𝑠 = 0.45 m
Terrain-aided SLAM via frequency-domain 
geo-referencing
 Non-Visual
Wang et al. [33]
IMU, barometer, magnetometer, 
airspeed sensor
RMSE𝑎𝑙𝑡 = 1.36Â°, RMSEℎ𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 
141 m
SALSTM
Cui et al. [31]
Mechanical antenna, ampliﬁer, 3D 
magnetic ﬁeld sensor
RMSE𝑝𝑜𝑠< 0.45 m
Positioning with mechanical antenna
Bodi et al. [36]
LiDAR
RMSE𝑟𝑒𝑙−𝑝𝑜𝑠 = 0.2593 m
LiDAR-based relative localization (k-means + 
vector matching)
El Sabbagh et al.
[34]
IMU
RMSE𝑝𝑜𝑠 = 8.6 m (high-grade IMU, 
50s outage)
Cascaded neural network for error estimation
Ahmed et al.
[35]
IMU, radar, barometer, magnetometer
RMSE3𝐷𝑝𝑜𝑠−𝑃𝐸= 5.11 ± 0.79 m
Radio odometry with nonlinear EKF/PF
 Hybrid
Ouyang et al.
[37]
Camera, vector map, altimeter, 
compass
MAE < 10 m
Coarse-to-Fine Building Vector Matching + 
PF (Gaussian mixture model)
Kinnari et al.
[28]
Camera, IMU, magnetometer
Localization error (x,y) = 
12.6–18.7 m
LSVL
Munguia et al.
[22]
Camera, IMU, altimeter
MAE = 0.12 ± 0.06𝜎 m
SCLAM
R@1 - recall at rank 1; AP - average precision; MAE - mean absolute error.
Fig. 1. Comparison of alternative UAV localization methods in GNSS-denied environments. TERCOM-EKF uses elevation map correlation and non-visual sensors. 
ViSensorRF fuses visual and non-visual inputs using a machine learning model to predict global position.
geolocation estimates through an EKF loop. The modular architecture is 
shown in Fig. 4, capturing the multi-sensor input fusion and correction 
processes.
3.1.1.  Inertial navigation system
The ﬁrst stage of the TERCOM-EKF localization pipeline relies on 
the onboard IMU, which provides raw six-degree-of-freedom (6-DoF) 
motion data. These measurements consist of the speciﬁc force vector 
𝐚𝑏= [𝑎𝑏
𝑥, 𝑎𝑏
𝑦, 𝑎𝑏
𝑧]⊤ obtained from the tri-axial accelerometers, and the an-
gular rate vector 𝝎𝑏= [𝜔𝑏
𝑥, 𝜔𝑏
𝑦, 𝜔𝑏
𝑧]⊤ obtained from the tri-axial gyro-
scopes. Both quantities are expressed in the UAV body frame (X-plane) 
and represent, respectively, the instantaneous linear acceleration and 
rotational velocity along the three principal axes of motion[38].
Strap-Down INS Integration. The raw inertial data are processed 
by a strap-down inertial navigation system (SINS), which integrates the 
accelerations and angular rates over time [39]. This integration yields:
• the estimated position vector in the local navigation frame, 𝐏𝑛
INS =
[𝑥𝑛, 𝑦𝑛, 𝑧𝑛]⊤;
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
4 
[p.5]
I. Jarraya et al.
Fig. 2. TERCOM - System diagram, Golden 1980 [41]
• the velocity vector 𝐕𝑏= [𝑣𝑏
𝑥, 𝑣𝑏
𝑦, 𝑣𝑏
𝑧]⊤; and
• the attitude vector 𝜽𝑛
INS = [𝜙, 𝜃, 𝜓]⊤, corresponding to roll, pitch, and 
yaw angles.
This stage forms the dead-reckoning backbone of the system, providing 
continuous navigation information through numerical integration of the 
IMU outputs.
Coordinate Transformation. To align the local NED-frame estimates 
with the global Earth reference, the SINS output is transformed from the 
navigation frame to the geodetic frame using a coordinate transforma-
tion matrix 𝐂𝑠. The transformation is expressed as:
𝑋INS = 𝐂𝑠⋅𝐏𝑛
INS
(1)
where 𝑋INS = (𝜙, 𝜆, ℎ) denotes the height ℎ, latitude 𝜙, and longitude 
𝜆. The initial reference parameters (𝜙0, 𝜆0, ℎ0) deﬁne the transformation 
origin.
3.1.2.  Altimetric sensor fusion
To determine terrain-relative altitude, the system fuses measure-
ments from:
• A barometric altimeter providing atmospheric-pressure-based alti-
tude ℎBARO
• A LiDAR unit measuring direct distance to ground ℎLiDAR
The observed terrain elevation below the UAV is computed as:
ℎobs = ℎBARO −ℎLiDAR
(2)
This value serves as the measured terrain height from the UAV’s cur-
rent perspective.
3.1.3.  Terrain contour matching
TERCOM, as shown in Fig. 2, is a widely used technique in UAV 
navigation that involves correlating real-time terrain data collected by 
onboard sensors with a pre-existing terrain map stored in a DEM. The 
success of TERCOM relies on the precision of the underlying mathemat-
ical models and algorithms [32,40].
a. Core Concepts in Terrain Contour Matching
The principal concepts of the TERCOM method and their relevance to 
UAV localization are outlined as follows:
• Observed Terrain Data: Let ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠= (ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠,0, ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠,1, … , ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠,𝑑−1) repre-
sent the vector of terrain contour data points observed by the UAV. 
This data represents the elevations of the terrain relative to a refer-
ence level, such as sea level. Each element ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠,𝑖 is a numerical value 
indicating the elevation at a speciﬁc geographic location, measured 
by the UAV’s sensors, which may include radar, LiDAR, or stereo-
scopic cameras.
• True Terrain Contour: The true terrain contour, denoted by ℎ𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒=
(ℎ𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒,0, ℎ𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒,1, … , ℎ𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒,𝑑−1), represents the actual elevations of the ter-
rain at the same geographic locations as the observed data. It is esti-
mated by combining the observed terrain data ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠 with a noise com-
ponent 𝑛= (𝑛0, 𝑛1, … , 𝑛𝑑−1), which accounts for inaccuracies such as 
sensor errors or environmental factors. The relationship between the 
true terrain contour and the observed terrain data can be expressed 
mathematically as:
ℎ𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒,𝑖= ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠,𝑖+ 𝑛𝑖
for 𝑖= 0, 1, … , 𝑑−1
(3)
The noise 𝑛𝑖 is often assumed to follow a Gaussian distribution, 
𝑛𝑖∼(0, 𝜎2), where 𝜎2 represents the variance of the noise.
• DEM Reference: The DEM, denoted by ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚, provides pre-existing 
accurate terrain elevation data for a speciﬁc region. It serves as 
a reference for comparing and matching the observed terrain data 
ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠. The DEM is typically obtained using remote sensing technolo-
gies, such as satellites, LiDAR, or aerial surveys, which capture high-
resolution elevation data. The DEM provides a reference model of 
the terrain’s elevation at a series of geographic points.
The DEM data can be expressed as:
ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,0,0
ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,0,1
…
ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,0,𝑛
ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,1,0
ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,1,1
…
ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,1,𝑛
⋮
⋮
⋱
⋮
ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑚,0
ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑚,1
…
ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑚,𝑛
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
(4)
where ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑖,𝑗 represents the elevation at the geographic location (𝑖, 𝑗)
within the region 𝐷, with 𝑚 being the number of latitude points and 
𝑛 being the number of longitude points.
The DEM provides an approximation of the actual terrain (ℎ𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒) 
and serves as a critical reference during the terrain matching process, 
facilitating the comparison and alignment of observed terrain data.
In this study, the DEM serves as the spatial reference for known ter-
rain data, providing an accurate geospatial foundation for terrain corre-
lation within the TERCOM framework. The DEM is derived from a Geo-
TIFF dataset representing the elevation distribution of the study area, 
as illustrated in Fig. 3. The ﬁgure presents a grayscale elevation map, a 
zoomed DEM region, and a 3 × 3 sampled elevation matrix, collectively 
demonstrating how elevation data are spatially organized and utilized 
in the matching process.
b. Terrain Matching Process
The accuracy of terrain-based localization in TERCOM depends on 
the degree of alignment between the observed terrain proﬁle and the 
reference DEM.
Match Metric 𝑀. The match metric quantiﬁes the diﬀerence be-
tween the observed terrain elevations and the corresponding DEM refer-
ence values across multiple geographic points. It serves as the primary 
similarity measure in the TERCOM framework, assessing how closely the 
UAV’s real-time sensor data align with the stored terrain model. In this 
study, the match metric is computed using the Mean Absolute Distance 
(MAD) function, which provides a robust and computationally eﬃcient 
basis for evaluating positional accuracy in the presence of sensor noise 
and terrain variability.
For the 𝑖-th observed terrain point and the 𝑗-th DEM candidate loca-
tion, the match metric is deﬁned as:
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
𝑀𝑖,𝑗= |||ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠,𝑖−ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑗,𝑖|||,
Individual match metric,
𝑀𝑗= 1
𝑑
𝑑−1
∑
𝑖=0
|||ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠,𝑖−ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑗,𝑖|||,
Aggregated match metric.
(5)
Here, 𝑀𝑖,𝑗 represents the absolute elevation diﬀerence between the 
observed and reference terrain for each point. At the same time, 𝑀𝑗
denotes the average similarity value across all 𝑑 observations for the 
𝑗-th DEM candidate location. Smaller values of 𝑀𝑗 indicate a stronger 
match between the observed terrain and the DEM, leading to a more 
accurate position estimate within the TERCOM-EKF framework.
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
5 
[p.6]
I. Jarraya et al.
Fig. 3. DEM representation with grayscale elevation map, zoomed region, and sampled elevation matrix.
Match Threshold. 𝑀0 The threshold 𝑀0 deﬁnes the maximum al-
lowable diﬀerence between the observed terrain ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠 and the DEM ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚
for a match to be considered valid. The relationship between 𝑀𝑗 and 
𝑀0 establishes the conﬁdence level in the UAV’s estimated position:
Match Probability =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
High (Accurate Position),
if 𝑀𝑗≤𝑀0
Low (Inaccurate Position),
if 𝑀𝑗> 𝑀0
(6)
A smaller 𝑀𝑗 therefore corresponds to a higher probability that the 
observed terrain segment accurately aligns with the DEM, while a larger 
𝑀𝑗 indicates a potential mismatch.
The stepwise procedure of the MAD-based TERCOM algorithm is 
summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 MAD-Based TERCOM algorithm for UAV terrain correla-
tion.
Require: ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠: vector of observed terrain elevations; ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚: DEM terrain 
elevations; 𝑀0: match threshold; 𝑑: number of observed terrain 
points; 𝐽: number of candidate DEM points.
Ensure: Estimated UAV position (𝜙𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡, 𝜆𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡, ℎ𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡).
1: Initialization: Initialize 𝑀𝑖,𝑗 and 𝑀𝑗 for all 𝑖∈[0, 𝑑−1] and 
𝑗∈[1, 𝐽−1]. 
2: for 𝑖= 0 to 𝑑−1 do
3:
for 𝑗= 1 to 𝐽−1 do
4:
Extract ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑗,𝑖 corresponding to candidate 𝑗 and observation 𝑖. 
5:
Compute individual match metric using Mean Absolute 
Distance (MAD):
𝑀𝑖,𝑗= |ℎ𝑜𝑏𝑠,𝑖−ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑗,𝑖|
6:
end for
7: end for
8: for 𝑗= 1 to 𝐽−1 do
9:
Compute aggregated match metric:
𝑀𝑗= 1
𝑑
𝑑−1
∑
𝑖=0
𝑀𝑖,𝑗
10:
if 𝑀𝑗< 𝑀0 then
11:
Store candidate position (𝜙𝑗, 𝜆𝑗, ℎ𝑑𝑒𝑚,𝑗) as potential match.
12:
end if
13: end for
14: Select (𝜙𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡, 𝜆𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡, ℎ𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡) = arg min𝑗𝑀𝑗. 
15: Output (𝜙𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡, 𝜆𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡, ℎ𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡) and update UAV search area for the next 
iteration.
3.1.4.  Extended Kalman ﬁlter
EKF reﬁnes the UAV’s estimated position by continuously fusing 
high-frequency inertial data with terrain-based updates, thereby com-
pensating for drift accumulation in the inertial navigation system during 
GNSS-denied ﬂight. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the EKF operates in two con-
secutive phases: the prediction stage, which propagates the state estimate 
and its uncertainty forward in time, and the correction stage, which re-
ﬁnes the estimate using new terrain-referenced observations from TER-
COM. The EKF state vector represents small corrections in the UAV’s 
geodetic position:
𝛿𝐗𝑘=
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
𝛿𝜙
𝛿𝜆
𝛿ℎ
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
(7)
where 𝛿𝜙, 𝛿𝜆, and 𝛿ℎ denote the latitude, longitude, and height error 
states, respectively.
Prediction Stage. In the prediction stage, the EKF propagates the 
estimated error state and its covariance forward in time based on the 
system dynamics matrix and the process noise covariance. The evolution 
of the state and covariance is given by:
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝛿𝐗−
𝑘= 𝐀⋅𝛿𝐗𝑘−1,
𝐏−
𝑘= 𝐅⋅𝐏𝑘−1 ⋅𝐅⊤+ 𝐐,
(8)
where:
• 𝐀 is the discrete-time system dynamics matrix deﬁning the linearized 
motion model.
• 𝐅 is the state transition matrix obtained from the Jacobian of the 
system equations.
• 𝐏−
𝑘 is the a priori covariance matrix representing the uncertainty of 
the predicted state.
• 𝐐 is the process noise covariance accounting for unmodeled dynam-
ics or system-level perturbations such as IMU bias drift, structural vi-
bration, and numerical integration errors, thereby ensuring stochas-
tic variation around the nominal motion model. It is modeled as a 
zero-mean Gaussian process:
𝐰𝑘∼(0, 𝐐)
(9)
Correction Stage. When a new terrain observation becomes avail-
able, the EKF performs measurement-based correction. The Kalman gain 
𝐊𝑘 determines the optimal weighting between the predicted state and 
the new observation:
𝐊𝑘= 𝐏−
𝑘𝐇⊤(𝐇𝐏−
𝑘𝐇⊤+ 𝐑)−1
(10)
where
• 𝐇 is the measurement sensitivity matrix relating the state variables 
to the observable quantities. 
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
6 
[p.7]
I. Jarraya et al.
• 𝐑 is the measurement noise accounting for inaccuracies in the ob-
servation process, including LiDAR range noise, barometric uncer-
tainty, and DEM interpolation errors. It quantiﬁes the reliability of 
terrain-based observations and is modeled as a zero-mean Gaussian 
process: 
𝐯𝑘∼(0, 𝐑)
(11)
The correction phase of the EKF updates the UAV’s estimated state 
by incorporating terrain-based observations from the TERCOM module. 
This step minimizes the drift accumulated by the inertial navigation sys-
tem through optimal probabilistic fusion of the predicted state and the 
measurement update. The corrected state estimate and the updated co-
variance matrix are expressed as a coupled system of equations:
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝛿𝐗𝑘= 𝛿𝐗−
𝑘+ 𝐊𝑘
(𝐳𝑘−𝐇𝛿𝐗−
𝑘
),
𝐏𝑘= (𝐈−𝐊𝑘𝐇)𝐏−
𝑘,
(12)
where 𝛿𝐗𝑘 is the corrected error state vector, 𝐊𝑘 is the Kalman gain, 𝐇
is the measurement matrix, 𝐳𝑘 is the measurement residual vector, and 
𝐏𝑘 is the updated state covariance matrix.
These system equations deﬁne the core mechanism of the EKF cor-
rection phase, ensuring that the UAV’s estimated geodetic position 
remains statistically consistent with terrain-referenced measurements 
while maintaining minimal uncertainty growth during GNSS-denied 
navigation. The Kalman gain adaptively adjusts the contribution of each 
sensor input based on its uncertainty, ensuring optimal weighting be-
tween the inertial prediction and the terrain-based correction. Conse-
quently, the TERCOM observations continuously bound the long-term 
drift of the INS, yielding a stable and accurate localization estimate even 
under prolonged GNSS-denied conditions.
3.1.5.  Final state update
After correction, the reﬁned UAV position is obtained by compensat-
ing the raw INS output with the updated EKF error state:
𝑋corrected = 𝑋INS −𝛿𝐗𝑘
(13)
This corrected position 𝑋corrected represents the best estimate of the 
UAV’s location in the local geodetic frame, maintaining reliable navi-
gation performance under GNSS-denied conditions. The output is sub-
sequently used for guidance, mapping, or autonomous control tasks.
3.2.  Visual-inertial sensor fusion with random forest regression
The Visual-Inertial Sensor Fusion with Random Forest Regression 
(ViSensorRF) framework aims to achieve accurate UAV localization in 
GNSS-denied environments by leveraging both visual and non-visual 
sensor data in a learning-based estimation pipeline. Unlike traditional 
model-based approaches such as TERCOM, which rely on DEM correla-
tion, ViSensorRF formulates localization as a supervised regression task 
and learns a direct mapping from sensory features to global geodetic 
coordinates using an RFR model, as shown in Fig. 5.
3.2.1.  Feature construction
At each timestamp 𝑖, the system acquires a synchronized set of multi-
modal sensor readings from the UAV’s onboard units, which are then 
combined into a single feature vector for supervised regression learning. 
The feature vector is deﬁned as:
𝐱𝑖= [𝐟vision, ℎLiDAR, ℎBARO, 𝐚IMU, 𝝎IMU
],
(14)
Where each component captures complementary spatial, altimetric, and 
dynamic information about the UAV and its surrounding environment:
• Visual Feature Vector (𝐟vision ∈ℝ𝑑): Each image 𝐼𝑖 captured by the 
UAV-mounted camera is ﬁrst converted to grayscale to reduce redun-
dancy and computational cost while preserving geometric and textu-
ral details. The image is resized to a uniform resolution of 64 × 64 pix-
els and subsequently ﬂattened into a one-dimensional vector through 
column-wise vectorization:
𝐟vision = vec(𝐼𝑖) ∈ℝ4096.
This operation transforms the 2D spatial intensity distribution into 
a compact numerical representation, allowing the Random Forest 
model to interpret terrain variations as structured numerical pat-
terns. All pixel intensities are normalized using z-score scaling to 
ensure numerical compatibility with non-visual features.
• LiDAR-Based Altitude (ℎLiDAR ∈ℝ): Represents the instantaneous 
vertical range between the UAV and the ground surface, mea-
sured directly by the LiDAR sensor. This parameter provides high-
precision, terrain-relative altitude data that enhances the system’s 
ability to discriminate between elevation contours and topographic 
features, particularly in uneven or sloped terrains.
• Barometric Altitude Estimate (ℎBARO ∈ℝ): Corresponds to an es-
timated altitude derived from the UAV’s onboard altitude and Li-
DAR measurements. In the implemented system, this feature is com-
puted as the diﬀerence between the barometric-based altitude and 
the LiDAR-measured range:
ℎbaro = ℎaltitude −ℎLiDAR,
Which eﬀectively approximates the UAV’s relative elevation above 
the local terrain. This synthetic barometric estimate improves verti-
cal stability by compensating for short-term LiDAR noise and atmo-
spheric variations.
• Inertial Measurements (𝐚IMU ∈ℝ3, 𝝎IMU ∈ℝ3): Denote the three-
axis linear acceleration and angular velocity vectors obtained from 
the IMU. These readings describe the UAV’s dynamic motion, includ-
ing translational acceleration and rotational rates, and are crucial for 
correlating visual and elevation changes with physical movement.
All sensory streams are precisely synchronized based on hardware 
timestamps to ensure that each multimodal observation 𝐱𝑖 reﬂects the 
UAV’s complete state at the same instant. Each feature channel is stan-
dardized using z-score normalization to equalize the statistical contri-
bution of heterogeneous sensors during training. The resulting multi-
modal feature vector encapsulates visual context, elevation cues, and 
dynamic motion information, forming the core input representation for 
the ViSensorRF learning-based localization framework in GNSS-denied 
environments.
3.2.2.  Regression model
The objective is to estimate the UAV’s geodetic position vector:
𝐲𝑖= [𝜙𝑖, 𝜆𝑖, ℎ𝑖] ∈ℝ3
(15)
where 𝜙𝑖, 𝜆𝑖, and ℎ𝑖 denote the latitude, longitude, and altitude, re-
spectively. The Random Forest model (⋅) learns the nonlinear mapping 
from features to global coordinates as:̂
𝐲𝑖= (𝐱𝑖) = 1
𝑇
𝑇∑
𝑡=1
𝑡(𝐱𝑖)
(16)
where 𝑡(⋅) is the prediction from the 𝑡-th decision tree in the ensemble 
of 𝑇 trees, and ̂𝐲𝑖 denotes the estimated position. The mean squared 
error (MSE) loss minimized during training is deﬁned as:
= 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑
𝑖=1
‖‖(𝐱𝑖) −𝐲𝑖‖‖
2
(17)
where 𝑁 is the total number of training samples.
ViSensorRF thus performs global position estimation in a purely 
data-driven manner, capturing complex interdependencies between sen-
sor readings and spatial coordinates. Its learning capability enables ro-
bust performance in visually structured and topographically diverse en-
vironments (see Algorithm 2).
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
7 
[p.8]
I. Jarraya et al.
Fig. 4. Architecture of the TERCOM-EKF pipeline. Multi-sensor inputs are fused using terrain matching and Kalman ﬁltering to estimate UAV position without GNSS.
Fig. 5. Architecture of the ViSensorRF framework, illustrating visual-inertial data fusion and position estimation through RFR.
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
8 
[p.9]
I. Jarraya et al.
Algorithm 2 ViSensorRF: Visual-inertial sensor fusion with RFR.
Require: Multi-modal sensor logs {𝐟vision, ℎLiDAR, ℎBARO, 𝐚IMU, 𝝎IMU}, 
ground-truth geodetic labels 𝐲𝑖= [𝜙𝑖, 𝜆𝑖, ℎ𝑖], and total samples 𝑁.
Ensure: Trained RFR model (⋅) and estimated UAV position ̂𝐲𝑖=
[̂𝜙𝑖,̂ 𝜆𝑖,̂ ℎ𝑖].
1: Feature Construction: 
2: for each timestamp 𝑖= 1 to 𝑁 do
3:
Extract visual features 𝐟vision from 𝐼𝑖 (grayscale conversion, resiz-
ing, ﬂattening). 
4:
Retrieve non-visual readings {ℎLiDAR, ℎBARO, 𝐚IMU, 𝝎IMU}. 
5:
Form feature vector:
𝐱𝑖= [𝐟vision, ℎLiDAR, ℎBARO, 𝐚IMU, 𝝎IMU]
(14)
6: end for
7: Construct matrices 𝐗∈ℝ𝑁×𝐷 and 𝐘∈ℝ𝑁×3.
8: Feature Normalization: 
9: Standardize 𝐗 via z-score normalization.
10: Model Training: 
11: Split (𝐗, 𝐘) into training and testing sets. 
12: Train Random Forest model (⋅)
13: Minimize loss  as in Eq. (17). 
14: Evaluate (⋅) using RMSE, MAE, and 𝑅2 on train/test data.
15: Inference: 
16: For new input 𝐱𝑡, estimate:̂
𝐲𝑡= (𝐱𝑡) = 1
𝑇
𝑇∑
𝑡=1
𝑡(𝐱𝑡)
(16)
17: Measure inference latency for real-time evaluation.
18: Visualization: 
19: Plot 3D trajectories of (𝜙, 𝜆, ℎ) comparing predicted ̂𝐲 and reference 
𝐲.
4.  Results and discussion
This section evaluates the two localization methods, TERCOM-EKF 
and ViSensorRF, over six UAV ﬂight datasets. The assessment considers 
longitude and latitude estimation errors, relative improvement percent-
ages, and execution time. The study also evaluates additional SLAM-
based and AI-driven localization methods, including fast-LIO, MINS, and 
XGBoost, for comparative analysis relative to the TERCOM and ViSen-
sorRF frameworks.
4.1.  Testing environment
Makkah Region in Saudi Arabia was selected as the testing ground 
for implementing TERCOM and ViSensorRF for UAV localization (see 
Fig. 6). This region oﬀers a diverse topography that combines moun-
tainous and desert landscapes with minimal urban elements.
For model training, the learning-based components (ViSensorRF and 
XGBoost) were trained using data generated from the Taif region. The 
dataset was divided into 75 % for training and 25 % for internal testing 
to validate model performance. Additionally, external validation was 
performed using ﬂight trajectories not included in either subset, provid-
ing a robust assessment of performance on unseen terrain and environ-
mental conditions.
Six trajectories were generated to evaluate both localization meth-
ods, following the UAV dataset generation framework presented in [42]. 
The simulations were conducted using the Robot Operating System 2 
(ROS 2), PX4, Gazebo, and QGroundControl.
The DEM was extracted and processed using QGIS and Blender to 
ensure accurate terrain representation. To emulate realistic ﬂight con-
ditions, the simulated sensors in Gazebo were conﬁgured with noise pro-
ﬁles that closely mimic real-world sensor behavior. The testing environ-
ment, sensor conﬁgurations, and DEM parameters are comprehensively 
summarized in Tables 2–4, respectively.
4.2.  Performance evaluation metrics
The evaluation of localization accuracy requires formal mathemat-
ical deﬁnitions to ensure objective comparison across datasets. In this 
study, error metrics are expressed both in Cartesian space (𝑋, 𝑌) and in 
geographic coordinates (longitude and latitude). The ﬁrst step involves 
computing the Cartesian Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), which quan-
tiﬁes the discrepancy between the estimated and ground-truth positions 
along each spatial axis. This metric, formally deﬁned in Eq. (18), pro-
vides a baseline measurement of localization accuracy in meters.
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸𝑑=
√
√
√
√1
𝑁
𝑁
∑
𝑖=1
(̂𝑝𝑑,𝑖−𝑝𝑑,𝑖
)2,
𝑑∈{𝑋, 𝑌}
(18)
Here, ̂𝑝𝑑,𝑖 denotes the estimated UAV position along the 𝑑-th axis 
(𝑋 or 𝑌), 𝑝𝑑,𝑖 represents the corresponding ground-truth position, and 
𝑁 is the total number of sampled positions. The RMSE thus measures 
the average deviation between the predicted and true positions, where 
lower values indicate higher localization accuracy.
Since UAV navigation is typically referenced in geodetic coordinates, 
these Cartesian errors are converted into longitude and latitude devi-
ations. The transformation from Cartesian displacements to geodetic 
coordinates is expressed in Eq. (19), which maps position diﬀerences 
(𝑋, 𝑌) into navigationally meaningful quantities (𝜆, 𝜙). This conversion 
allows performance assessment to be reported directly in terms of lon-
gitude and latitude errors, making results more interpretable for aerial 
navigation applications.
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝜆= 𝜆0 +
𝑋
𝑅cos(𝜙0) ,
𝜙= 𝜙0 + 𝑌
𝑅.
(19)
where 𝜆 and 𝜙 denote longitude and latitude, (𝜆0, 𝜙0) the reference 
position, and 𝑅 the Earth’s radius.
Once the transformation is applied, the RMSE values can be com-
puted separately for longitude and latitude, as shown in Eq. (20). This 
formulation captures directional discrepancies in geodetic space, en-
abling detailed evaluation of errors speciﬁc to each coordinate dimen-
sion.
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸𝜆=
√
1
𝑁
∑𝑁
𝑖=1
(̂𝜆𝑖−𝜆𝑖
)2,
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸𝜙=
√
1
𝑁
∑𝑁
𝑖=1
(̂𝜙𝑖−𝜙𝑖
)2.
(20)
Finally, to highlight the performance advantage of one method over 
another, an improvement percentage metric is introduced in Eq. (21). 
This metric expresses the relative reduction in error achieved by ViSen-
sorRF compared to TERCOM-EKF, allowing direct interpretation of gains 
in terms of accuracy improvements across all six evaluated UAV ﬂight 
datasets.
Δ% = 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸TERCOM −𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸ViSensorRF
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸TERCOM
× 100
(21)
4.3.  TERCOM-EKF Results
Table 5 summarizes the localization accuracy obtained with the 
TERCOM-EKF method across six UAV ﬂight datasets. Results are pre-
sented both in Cartesian coordinates (𝑋, 𝑌) and in converted geodetic 
coordinates (longitude 𝜆, latitude 𝜙). This dual representation provides 
a comprehensive view of the method’s performance by reporting raw 
spatial deviations in meters, while also expressing errors in navigation-
ally meaningful degrees.
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
9 
[p.10]
I. Jarraya et al.
Fig. 6. GroundControl (QGC) interface used to deﬁne and monitor UAV ﬂight trajectories over the Taif region.
Table 2 
Simulation and testing environment conﬁguration. 
Component
Details
Hardware Speciﬁcations
Intel i7 CPU with 16 GiB RAM and an NVIDIA 
GeForce RTX 3070 Mobile GPU
Simulation Framework
ROS2, PX4, Gazebo, QGroundControl
Terrain Modeling Tools
QGIS, Blender, NASA DEMs
Localization Region
Taif region, Makkah Province, Saudi Arabia, 
(21◦16′50ε𝑁, 40◦13′06ε𝐸), elevation 847.25 m
Evaluation Dataset
Six UAV trajectories generated using 
ROS2-PX4 framework with terrain-grounded 
synthetic data
Sensor Inputs Used
LiDAR, barometer, IMU, and camera data 
(multi-modal)
Localization Methods 
Compared
TERCOM-EKF (map-based correlation) vs. 
ViSensorRF (RFR using sensor fusion)
Performance Metrics
RMSE (X, Y), longitude/latitude error, relative 
error improvement (%), execution time
Table 3 
Sensor conﬁguration parameters.
Sensor
Conﬁguration Details
RGB Camera
Resolution: 320 × 240 pixels; focal length 
𝑓𝑥= 𝑓𝑦= 277.19; principal point (160, 120).
LiDAR
Range: 0.1–120 m; angular resolution 0.25◦; 
scan rate 10 Hz; Gaussian noise 𝜎= 0.02 m.
IMU
6-DOF accelerometer and gyroscope; 
accelerometer noise 0.01 m/s2; gyroscope 
noise 0.001 rad/s; bias drift matches 
MPU-6050 speciﬁcations.
Barometer
Pressure-based altitude sensor; noise standard 
deviation 𝜎= 0.1 m.
Table 4 
DEM Parameters for Taif region.
 Attribute
 Speciﬁcation
 Coordinate Reference System
 EPSG:4326
 Spatial resolution
≈ 28.81 m/pixel.
 Geographical extent
 covers ≈57.9 km2.
Table 5 
TERCOM-EKF Results: RMSE in cartesian coordinates and converted geodetic 
errors (longitude/latitude).
 Trajectory (Data 𝑖)
 RMSEX (m)
 RMSEY (m)
 RMSE𝜆 (◦)
 RMSE𝜙 (◦)
 Trajectory 1 (Data 1)
 414.564
 878.305
 0.00400
 0.00791
 Trajectory 2 (Data 2)
 233.180
 822.759
 0.00225
 0.00741
 Trajectory 3 (Data 3)
 706.616
 700.114
 0.00682
 0.00631
 Trajectory 4 (Data 4)
 645.999
 864.547
 0.00623
 0.00779
 Trajectory 5 (Data 5)
 854.889
 786.126
 0.00825
 0.00708
 Trajectory 6 (Data 6)
 963.244
 770.036
 0.00930
 0.00694
The TERCOM-EKF method demonstrates a moderate level of accu-
racy. In Cartesian space, RMSE values range from approximately 200 m 
to nearly 960 m, with both longitudinal and latitudinal errors contribut-
ing to the overall deviation. When expressed in geodetic form, the errors 
fall within the order of 10−3 to 10−2 degrees. These correspond to sev-
eral hundred meters of positional displacement, which, while suﬃcient 
for coarse navigation, remain inadequate for precise UAV guidance in 
GNSS-denied environments.
Notably, Trajectory 2 exhibits the lowest Cartesian RMSE (233 m in 
𝑋 and 823 m in 𝑌), corresponding to approximately 0.00225◦ in longi-
tude and 0.00741◦ in latitude.
In contrast, Trajectory 6 shows the highest overall error, exceeding 
960 m in 𝑋 and 770 m in 𝑌, equivalent to nearly 0.0093◦ longitude devi-
ation. These ﬁndings underline the variability of TERCOM-EKF perfor-
mance across trajectories, inﬂuenced by factors such as terrain richness, 
ﬂight path complexity, and sensor drift.
Overall, the TERCOM-EKF serves as a useful baseline, establishing 
the limitations of classical terrain-aided ﬁltering under GNSS-denied 
conditions. Its results provide a benchmark for assessing the improve-
ments achieved by data-driven approaches such as ViSensorRF, dis-
cussed in the following subsection.
4.4.  ViSensorRF results
Table 6 reports the localization accuracy achieved with the ViSen-
sorRF method. Unlike TERCOM-EKF, which relies on correlation-based 
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
10 
[p.11]
I. Jarraya et al.
Table 6 
ViSensorRF results: RMSE in geodetic coordinates (longitude/lat-
itude) with corrected meter equivalents at 𝜙0 = 21.28◦ (1◦𝜙≈
111,320 m, 1◦𝜆≈103,730 m).
 Trajectory (Data 𝑖)
 RMSE𝜆 (◦) [m]
 RMSE𝜙 (◦) [m]
 Trajectory 1 (Data 1)
9.58 × 10−6 (0.99 m)
3.12 × 10−5 (3.47 m)
 Trajectory 2 (Data 2)
1.76 × 10−5 (1.83 m)
1.02 × 10−5 (1.14 m)
 Trajectory 3 (Data 3)
1.58 × 10−5 (1.64 m)
1.00 × 10−5 (1.11 m)
 Trajectory 4 (Data 4)
3.70 × 10−5 (3.84 m)
3.22 × 10−5 (3.58 m)
 Trajectory 5 (Data 5)
1.10 × 10−5 (1.15 m)
1.93 × 10−5 (2.15 m)
 Trajectory 6 (Data 6)
2.33 × 10−5 (2.41 m)
4.51 × 10−5 (5.02 m)
Table 7 
Performance comparison be-
tween 
TERCOM-EKF 
and 
ViSensorRF across six UAV 
trajectories. Improvements in 
geodetic RMSE are shown.
 Trajectory
Δ𝜆 (%)
Δ𝜙 (%)
 1
 99.76
 99.61
 2
 99.22
 99.86
 3
 99.77
 99.84
 4
 99.41
 99.59
 5
 99.87
 99.73
 6
 99.75
 99.35
matching within the EKF, ViSensorRF leverages machine learning re-
gression to directly predict positional corrections from sensor and ter-
rain features.
The results show a substantial reduction in error magnitude com-
pared to TERCOM-EKF. RMSE values consistently fall within the order of 
10−5 degrees, translating into meter-level positional deviations. Speciﬁ-
cally, across the six datasets, longitudinal errors range between 0.99 m 
and 3.84 m, while latitudinal errors remain between 1.11 m and 5.02 m. 
This represents nearly two orders of magnitude improvement relative 
to TERCOM-EKF, which typically exhibits errors of several hundred me-
ters.
Dataset 1, for instance, improves from approximately 400–880 m 
RMSE in Cartesian coordinates under TERCOM-EKF to below 4 m under 
ViSensorRF. Even the more challenging Dataset 6, which records errors 
exceeding 960 m with TERCOM-EKF, achieves errors around 5 m with 
ViSensorRF. This demonstrates the robustness of the machine learning 
approach across diﬀerent ﬂight trajectories and terrain conditions.
Overall, the ViSensorRF method achieves near real-time, meter-level 
localization accuracy in GNSS-denied conditions, marking a signiﬁcant 
advancement over classical terrain-referenced ﬁltering.
4.5.  Trajectory visualizations
To further evaluate the localization performance of the proposed 
methods, a series of trajectory comparisons was conducted between the 
estimated paths and the corresponding ground-truth references. Figs. 7, 
and 8 illustrate representative results obtained across diﬀerent UAV 
datasets. Fig. 7 presents two examples of ViSensorRF predictions in out-
door ﬂight scenarios. The predicted 2D trajectories (blue curves) are 
overlaid on the corresponding ground-truth paths (red curves). In both 
cases, ViSensorRF demonstrates robust performance, producing nearly 
overlapping curves with minimal deviations. These results indicate that 
ViSensorRF is able to exploit the correlation between inertial and visual-
inertial features to achieve sub-meter accuracy even under challenging 
GNSS-denied conditions.
Fig. 8 provides a direct comparison between the TERCOM-EKF, and 
ViSensorRF methods for the same dataset. In Fig. 8(a), TERCOM-EKF 
shows notable drift and mismatches in both lateral and longitudinal di-
rections, particularly visible in areas with limited terrain texture. This 
is a well-known limitation of terrain-referenced navigation, which is 
highly dependent on map granularity and initialization accuracy.
Conversely, Fig. 8(b) show that ViSensorRF successfully reconstructs 
the UAV trajectory with near-perfect overlap with the reference, clearly 
outperforming TERCOM-EKF.
Overall, the trajectory visualizations conﬁrm that ViSensorRF signiﬁ-
cantly improves localization accuracy compared to conventional terrain-
matching strategies such as TERCOM-EKF. This improvement is es-
pecially pronounced in complex or repetitive terrain patterns, where
traditional correlation-based approaches tend to diverge. The consis-
tency of ViSensorRF across diﬀerent datasets emphasizes its potential 
for robust UAV navigation in GNSS-denied environments.
4.6.  Discussion
The comparative results in Table 7 demonstrate a clear dominance of 
ViSensorRF over TERCOM-EKF in terms of localization accuracy. Across 
all six trajectories, ViSensorRF consistently reduces RMSE values by 
more than 99 % compared to TERCOM-EKF. This gain reﬂects the ad-
vantage of leveraging multi-modal sensor fusion and machine learning 
regression, which enables ViSensorRF to capture nonlinear correlations 
inaccessible to correlation-based terrain matching.
Three key insights emerge from these results:
• Robustness to terrain variability. TERCOM-EKF performance is 
strongly dependent on terrain richness and initialization. It tends to 
drift when ﬂying over texture-sparse or featureless regions, where 
altitude-terrain correlation signals are weak. By contrast, ViSen-
sorRF remains stable even under challenging conditions, consistently 
achieving meter-level accuracy. This robustness highlights the capac-
ity of data-driven models to fuse heterogeneous sensor modalities 
and adapt to variable environments.
• Computational trade-oﬀ. Despite its superior accuracy, ViSensorRF 
requires a considerably longer processing time per localization cy-
cle on a standard Intel i7 CPU (1.92s), whereas TERCOM-EKF com-
pletes each cycle in only 0.04s. This substantial eﬃciency advan-
tage makes TERCOM-EKF more suitable for real-time deployment 
on resource-constrained UAVs. This contrast arises from their un-
derlying principles. ViSensorRF is a data-driven learning approach 
that infers position via multi-sensor regression, while TERCOM-EKF 
relies on direct terrain matching and ﬁltering. The data-driven de-
sign enables ViSensorRF to capture complex sensor relationships and 
achieve higher precision, but it also increases computational demand 
and depends on high-quality, region-speciﬁc training data. Conse-
quently, retraining or ﬁne-tuning is required when deploying ViSen-
sorRF in new environments, whereas TERCOM-EKF remains more 
immediately transferable and eﬃcient for real-time embedded UAV 
applications.
• Operational implications. The improvement from kilometer-scale 
errors under TERCOM-EKF to meter-scale precision under ViSen-
sorRF represents a transformative leap for UAV navigation in GNSS-
denied environments. Achieving meter-level localization accuracy 
enables advanced missions, such as safe urban ﬂights, swarming co-
ordination, and terrain-following operations, that would be infeasi-
ble with TERCOM-EKF alone.
In summary, ViSensorRF delivers superior accuracy and robustness 
but at the expense of signiﬁcantly higher computational requirements. 
TERCOM-EKF, while less precise, is faster and lighter, making it attrac-
tive for onboard embedded platforms where low-latency operation is 
critical. Future research should prioritize improving the eﬃciency of 
ViSensorRF through techniques such as model compression, pruning, 
quantization, or hardware acceleration to make its robustness deploy-
able under real-time constraints. Another promising direction lies in 
hybrid architectures, where TERCOM-EKF provides rapid, low-latency 
updates and ViSensorRF supplies periodic, high-accuracy corrections, 
achieving a practical balance between eﬃciency and precision. Finally, 
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
11 
[p.12]
I. Jarraya et al.
Fig. 7. Comparison of the ViSensorRF-predicted 2D UAV trajectories with ground-truth 3D ﬂight paths in outdoor environments for two representative cases.
Fig. 8. Comparison of UAV trajectories generated by (a) TERCOM-EKF and (b) ViSensorRF. While TERCOM-EKF suﬀers from accumulated drift and terrain depen-
dency, ViSensorRF achieves near-perfect alignment with the real trajectory, demonstrating superior localization accuracy.
the establishment of a standardized benchmarking framework will en-
able fair and systematic evaluation of localization strategies across di-
verse environmental and sensor conditions, accelerating the translation 
of research advances into practical, mission-ready UAV systems.
4.7.  Comparative evaluation with other localization methods
Additional state-of-the-art localization methods were implemented 
and evaluated under GNSS-denied conditions using the same dataset 
and UAV ﬂight trajectories. Two widely recognized frameworks, Fast 
LiDAR-Inertial Odometry (Fast-LIO) and the Multisensor-Aided Inertial 
Navigation System (MINS), were integrated as established benchmarks 
representing the Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO) and Simultaneous Lo-
calization and Mapping (SLAM) paradigms. Furthermore, a non-visual, 
learning-based model, XGBoost (eXtreme Gradient Boosting), was in-
cluded to provide a data-driven perspective within the same compar-
ative evaluation framework. Fast-LIO fuses LiDAR and IMU data for 
real-time motion estimation [43,44], while MINS integrates camera, 
LiDAR, and IMU measurements within a tightly coupled optimization 
framework [45]. These methods enable a cross-domain comparison en-
compassing SLAM-based estimation, visual-inertial fusion, and machine 
learning regression for UAV localization in GNSS-denied environments.
The SLAM-based methods, Fast-LIO and MINS, failed to maintain 
stable localization at higher altitudes where visual and structural fea-
tures were sparse or indistinguishable. As shown in Fig. 9, the Fast-LIO 
implementation in the Taif region using ROS 2, Gazebo, and QGround-
Control illustrates the UAV trajectory visualization obtained in RViz
under GNSS-denied conditions. In this ﬁgure, green represents the 
ground-truth UAV trajectory, purple corresponds to the estimated trajec-
tory produced by the localization algorithm, and yellow illustrates the 
UAV’s estimated pose. A similar degradation was observed for MINS un-
der the same conditions. This degradation arises from the limited texture 
and reduced correspondence quality required for reliable SLAM feature 
matching.
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
12 
[p.13]
I. Jarraya et al.
Fig. 9. RViz visualization (ROS visualization tool) of UAV localization trajectories using Fast-LIO framework. It shows the ground-truth UAV trajectory (green) of the 
UAV during a takeoﬀ to a height of approx. 1 km, estimated position trajectory produced by FAST-LIO framework (purple), and the instantaneous UAV’s estimated 
position vector (yellow), the last estimate by FAST-LIO. The ﬁgure shows a clear divergence of the position estimates with respect to the ground truth.
Table 8 
XGBoost results: RMSE in cartesian coordinates and converted 
geodetic errors (longitude/latitude).
 Trajectory (Data 𝑖) RMSE𝑋 (m) RMSE𝑌 (m) RMSE𝜆 ( ◦) RMSE𝜙 ( ◦)
 Trajectory 1
 2.6892
 2.2843
2.6 × 10−5
2.1 × 10−5
 Trajectory 2
 3.6056
 1.7203
3.5 × 10−5
1.5 × 10−5
 Trajectory 3
 2.0146
 1.7914
1.9 × 10−5
1.6 × 10−5
 Trajectory 4
 1.9923
 1.5835
1.9 × 10−5
1.4 × 10−5
 Trajectory 5
 2.9024
 1.9556
2.8 × 10−5
1.8 × 10−5
 Trajectory 6
 3.7471
 1.6293
3.6 × 10−5
1.5 × 10−5
Table 9 
Comparison of localization strategies.
 Localization Strategy
 RMSEX (m)
 RMSEY (m)
 MINS
 Failed
 Failed
 Fast-LIO
 Failed
 Failed
 XGBoost
 1.9923-3.7471
 1.5835-2.2843
 TERCOM-EKF
 233.180–963.244
 700.114–878.305
 ViSensorRF
 0.99-3.84
 1.11-5.02
To address the instability observed in SLAM-based techniques under 
sparse visual conditions, AI-driven approaches such as ViSensorRF and 
XGBoost were introduced. ViSensorRF combines visual and non-visual 
sensor data within an RFR framework, achieving competitive RMSE val-
ues but with higher computational cost. In contrast, XGBoost [46] fuses 
LiDAR, IMU, and barometric measurements without relying on visual 
inputs, making it particularly suitable for visually degraded conditions. 
By learning nonlinear relationships between multi-sensor inputs and po-
sitional outputs, XGBoost provides an adaptive correction mechanism 
that eﬀectively captures dynamic sensor behavior. The corresponding 
results are presented in Table 8.
Table 9 summarizes the RMSE values obtained for all evaluated 
methods. ViSensorRF signiﬁcantly outperforms traditional estimation 
techniques such as TERCOM-EKF, reducing the RMSE from hundreds 
of meters to only a few meters. XGBoost achieves comparable accu-
racy while oﬀering faster execution. The measured execution times were 
0.04s for TERCOM-EKF, 0.498s for XGBoost, and 1.92s for ViSensorRF, 
conﬁrming the computational advantage of the learning-based model.
These ﬁndings suggest that the most eﬀective strategy is a hybrid 
fusion of TERCOM-EKF and XGBoost, combining the rapid baseline es-
timation capability of TERCOM-EKF with the adaptive reﬁnement of 
XGBoost to achieve both real-time performance and high localization 
accuracy in GNSS-denied environments.
Despite these promising results, this study has certain limitations. 
The evaluation was conducted using a single regional dataset represent-
ing the Taif terrain, and the DEM was generated from real-world ele-
vation data using the available open-source os-rfodg framework [42]. 
However, obtaining accurate, high-resolution DEMs across diﬀerent re-
gions worldwide remains a considerable challenge due to limited data 
accessibility, variations in spatial resolution, and regional restrictions 
on geospatial information. Therefore, additional testing across multiple 
landscapes using veriﬁed DEM sources is necessary to validate cross-
terrain generalizability fully. In future work, the proposed TERCOM-
XGBoost hybrid framework will be expanded and evaluated using real-
world UAV ﬂight datasets combined with high-precision DEM data
covering geographically diverse environments.
5.  Conclusion and future work
This study presented a comprehensive comparative evaluation of 
multiple UAV localization strategies for GNSS-denied environments, in-
cluding TERCOM-EKF, ViSensorRF, Fast-LIO, MINS, and XGBoost. The 
ﬁndings reveal that ViSensorRF, a visual-inertial learning-based ap-
proach, achieves an over 99 % reduction in localization error relative 
to TERCOM-EKF and consistently maintains sub-5 m RMSE, with sev-
eral trajectories showing near-perfect alignment with the ground truth. 
In contrast, TERCOM-EKF oﬀers lower positional accuracy but oper-
ates at 0.04s, demonstrating strong suitability for real-time, resource-
constrained UAV platforms. Among the additional methods, Fast-LIO 
and MINS failed to converge at high altitudes due to the sparsity of 
visual features. In contrast, XGBoost achieved comparable accuracy to 
ViSensorRF while signiﬁcantly reducing execution time.
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
13 
[p.14]
I. Jarraya et al.
These results highlight a fundamental trade-oﬀ between precision 
and computational eﬃciency, oﬀering both theoretical insights into 
how sensor modality and learning architecture inﬂuence localization 
robustness and practical guidance for UAV navigation in GNSS-denied 
missions. While the AI-based approaches demonstrated excellent accu-
racy by leveraging multi-sensor data rather than traditional matching 
and ﬁltering, their dependence on high-quality, region-speciﬁc training 
data limits their generalizability. Applying these models to new environ-
ments would require retraining or ﬁne-tuning to accommodate terrain 
and environmental variability. This limitation deﬁnes a clear direction 
for future research, emphasizing cross-regional validation to enhance 
scalability and robustness.
Considering the combined factors of computational time, localiza-
tion accuracy, generalizability, data availability, and sensor cost, the 
choice of the most suitable method is application dependent. To further 
enhance real-time applicability, future research will focus on computa-
tional optimization of learning-based models through pruning, quanti-
zation, and hardware acceleration. Additionally, a hybrid localization 
framework is proposed, in which TERCOM-EKF provides continuous, 
high-frequency baseline updates, and ViSensorRF or XGBoost provides 
periodic, high-accuracy corrections. Synchronization between the two 
modules will be managed via timestamp alignment and adaptive up-
date scheduling, ensuring that reﬁned AI-based estimates are seamlessly 
integrated into the TERCOM-EKF prediction cycle without introducing 
latency. This hybrid strategy aims to bridge the gap between robustness 
and real-time feasibility, advancing the deployment of resilient, adap-
tive localization systems for mission-critical UAV operations.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Imen Jarraya: Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, 
Software, Methodology; Khaled Gabr: Writing – original draft, Vi-
sualization, Validation, Software, Data curation; Mohamed Abdelka-
der: Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology, Formal anal-
ysis; Fatimah Alahmed: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodol-
ogy; Muhammad Bilal Kadri: Writing – review & editing, Resources, 
Project administration, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal anal-
ysis; Wadii Boulila: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis, Conceptualization.
Data availability
The dataset used in this study is publicly available on 
Hugging 
Face: 
https://huggingface.co/datasets/riotu-lab/
os-rfodg-outdoor-uav-synthetic-dataset-taif-saudi-arabia.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors state that they have no known ﬁnancial interests or per-
sonal relationships that could have inﬂuenced the work presented in this 
paper. 
Acknowledgments
The authors extend their sincere appreciation to Prince Sultan Uni-
versity for covering the Article Processing Charges (APC) associated 
with this publication.
References
[1] A.J. Moshayedi, Z. Wang, M. Sharifdoust, A.S. Khoojine, W. Zhang, A. Kolahdooz, 
J. Hu, Smart farming solutions: a user-friendly GUI for maize tassel estimation us-
ing YOLO with dynamic and ﬁxed labelling, featuring video support, IEEE Access 
(2025).
[2] M. Tanveer, etal. , Towards a secure and computational framework for Internet 
of Drones enabled aerial computing, IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng. 10 (5) (2022) 
3058–3070.
[3] Y. Yao, C. Sun, T. Wang, J. Yang, E. Zheng, UAV Geo-localization dataset and method 
based on cross-view matching, Sensors 24 (21) (2024). https://doi.org/10.3390/
s24216905
[4] M. Norbelt, X. Luo, J. Sun, U. Claude, UAV Localization in urban area
mobility environment based on monocular VSLAM with deep learning, Drones 
9 (3) (2025). https://www.mdpi.com/2504-446X/9/3/171. https://doi.org/10.
3390/drones9030171
[5] C.V.S. Babu, A. Pal, Enhancing security for unmanned aircraft systems in IoT envi-
ronments: defense mechanisms and mitigation strategies, in: S.K. Gupta, M. Kumar, 
A. Nayyar, S. Mahajan (Eds.), Unmanned Aircraft Systems, Wiley, 2024, 429–476, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781394230648.ch11.
[6] Y. Chang, Y. Cheng, U. Manzoor, J. Murray, A review of UAV autonomous navigation 
in GPS-denied environments, Rob. Auton. Syst. 170 (2023) 104533.
[7] E. Fredeluces, T. Ozeki, N. Kubo, A. El-Mowafy, Modiﬁed RTK-GNSS for challenging 
environments, Sensors 24 (9) (2024) 2712.
[8] G. Huang, S. Du, D. Wang, GNSS Techniques for real-time monitoring of landslides: 
a review, Satellite Navig. 4 (1) (2023) 5.
[9] W.M. Othman, A.A. Ateya, M.E. Nasr, A. Muthanna, M. ElAﬀendi, A. Koucheryavy, 
A.A. Hamdi, Key enabling technologies for 6G: the role of UAVs, terahertz commu-
nication, and intelligent reconﬁgurable surfaces in shaping the future of wireless 
networks, J. Sens. Actuat. Netw. 14 (2) (2025) 30.
[10] C. Brommer, A. Fornasier, M. Scheiber, J. Delaune, R. Brockers, J. Steinbrener, S. 
Weiss, The INSANE dataset: large number of sensors for challenging UAV ﬂights in 
Mars analog, outdoor, and out-/indoor transition scenarios, Int. J. Rob. Res. 43 (8) 
(2024) 1083–1113, https://doi.org/10.1177/02783649241227245.
[11] N. El-Sheimy, A. Youssef, Inertial sensors technologies for navigation applications: 
state of the art and future trends, Satellite Navig. 1 (1) (2020) 2.
[12] J. Xuan, T. Zhu, G. Peng, F. Sun, D. Dong, A review on the inertial measurement 
unit array of microelectromechanical systems, Sensors 24 (22) (2024) 7140.
[13] H. Guo, X. Chen, M. Yu, M. Uradzi´nski, L. Cheng, The usefulness of sensor fusion for 
unmanned aerial vehicle indoor positioning, Int. J. Intell. Unmanned Syst. 12 (1) 
(2024) 1–18.
[14] M.N. Cahyadi, T. Asﬁhani, H.F. Suhandri, S.C. Navisa, Analysis of GNSS/IMU sen-
sor fusion at UAV quadrotor for navigation, in: IOP Conference Series: Earth and 
Environmental Science,  1276, IOP Publishing, 2023, p. 012021.
[15] D. Janos, P. Kuras, Ł. Ortyl, Evaluation of low-cost RTK GNSS receiver in motion 
under demanding conditions, Measurement 201 (2022) 111647.
[16] A.T. Fragoso, C.T. Lee, A.S. McCoy, S.J. Chung, A seasonally invariant deep trans-
form for visual terrain-relative navigation, Sci. Rob. 6 (55) (2021) eabf3320.
[17] M.H. Rahman, M.A.S. Sejan, M.A. Aziz, R. Tabassum, J.I. Baik, H.K. Song, A compre-
hensive survey of unmanned aerial vehicles detection and classiﬁcation using ma-
chine learning approach: challenges, solutions, and future directions, Remote Sens. 
16 (5) (2024) 879.
[18] Z. Wang, D. Shi, C. Qiu, S. Jin, T. Li, Y. Shi, Z. Liu, Z. Qiao, Sequence matching for 
image-based UAV-to-satellite geolocalization, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 62 
(2024) 5607815, https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2024.3359605.
[19] A. Roux, S. Changey, J. Weber, J.P. Lauﬀenburger, LSTM-Based projectile trajectory 
estimation in a GNSS-denied environment, Sensors 23 (6) (2023) 3025.
[20] I. Jarraya, A. Al-Batati, M.B. Kadri, M. Abdelkader, A. Ammar, W. Boulila, A. 
Koubaa, GNSS-Denied unmanned aerial vehicle navigation: analyzing computa-
tional complexity, sensor fusion, and localization methodologies, Satellite Navig. 
6 (1) (2025) 9. https://doi.org/10.1186/s43020-025-00162-z
[21] M. Junaid, M.E. Al-Atroush, S. Mahmood, K. Sultan Shah, A. Ullah, Recent develop-
ments in unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) surveys for rock slope stability analysis–a 
review, Geocarto Int. 40 (1) (2025) 2519915.
[22] R. Munguia, A. Grau, Y. Bolea, G. Obregón-Pulido, A simultaneous control, lo-
calization, and mapping system for UAVs in GPS-denied environments, Drones 9 
(1) (2025). https://www.mdpi.com/2504-446X/9/1/69. https://doi.org/10.3390/
drones9010069
[23] H. Gao, Y. Yu, X. Huang, L. Song, L. Li, L. Li, L. Zhang, Enhancing the localiza-
tion accuracy of UAV images under GNSS denial conditions, Sensors 23 (24) (2023)
9751.
[24] M.B.K. Soﬁa Yousuf, Improving the position accuracy and computational eﬃciency 
of UAV terrain aided navigation using a two-stage hybrid fuzzy particle ﬁltering 
method, Comput. Mater. Cont. 82 (1) (2025) 1193–1210. http://www.techscience.
com/cmc/v82n1/59207. https://doi.org/10.32604/cmc.2024.054587
[25] X. Wan, Y. Shao, S. Zhang, S. Li, Terrain aided planetary UAV localization based on 
geo-referencing, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 60 (2022) 1–18.
[26] F. Yao, C. Lan, L. Wang, H. Wan, T. Gao, Z. Wei, GNSS-Denied geolocalization of 
UAVs using terrain-weighted constraint optimization, Int. J. Appl. Earth Obs. Geoinf. 
135 (2024) 104277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2024.104277
[27] A. Gupta, X. Fernando, Simultaneous localization and mapping (slam) and data fu-
sion in unmanned aerial vehicles: recent advances and challenges, Drones 6 (4) 
(2022) 85.
[28] J. Kinnari, R. Renzulli, F. Verdoja, V. Kyrki, LSVL: large-scale season-invariant visual 
localization for UAVs, Rob. Auton. Syst. 168 (2023) 104497.
[29] I. Lee, C.K. Sung, H. Lee, S. Nam, J. Oh, K. Lee, C. Park, Georeferenced UAV local-
ization in mountainous terrain under GNSS-Denied conditions, Drones (2025).
[30] Q. Zhou, H. Tang, Z. Zhang, Y. Xu, F. Xiao, Y. Jia, A hierarchical absolute visual 
localization system for low-altitude drones in GNSS-Denied environments, Remote 
Sens. 17 (20) (2025) 3470.
[31] Y. Cui, C. Wang, Q. Hu, B. Xu, X. Song, Z. Yuan, Y. Zhu, A novel positioning method 
for UAV in GNSS-denied environments based on mechanical antenna, IEEE Trans. 
Ind. Electron. 71 (10) (2024) 13461–13469.
[32] I. Jarraya, M. Abdelkader, K. Gabr, A. AlMusalami, Non-visual terrain navigation 
for UAVs: a comparative study in GPS-denied, in: International Conference on Smart 
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
14 
[p.15]
I. Jarraya et al.
Systems and Emerging Technologies: Edition 2024,  1401, Springer Nature, 2025, 
p. 345.
[33] Z. Wang, X. Shen, J. Li, J. Li, X. Wu, Y. Yang, Enhancing integrated navigation with a 
self-attention LSTM hybrid network for UAVs in GNSS-denied environments, Drones 
9 (4) (2025) 279.
[34] M.S.E. Sabbagh, A. Maher, M.A.H. Abozied, A.M. Kamel, Promoting navigation sys-
tem eﬃciency during GPS outage via cascaded neural networks: a novel AI based ap-
proach, Mechatronics 94 (2023) 103026. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mechatronics.
2023.103026
[35] A.A. Hammadi, J. Yang, Z. Zhang, C. Yuen, M. Debbah, An experimental analysis 
of outdoor UAV localisation through diverse estimators and crowd-sensed data fu-
sion, Transp. Res. Proc. 69 (2024) 193–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2024.
06.193
[36] M.A. Bodi, L. Zhenbao, F. Jiang, Z. Wen, D. Qingqing, W. Xiao, J. Zhang, W. Lina, 
Reinforcement learning based UAV formation control in GPS-denied environment, 
Chin. J. Aeronaut. 36 (11) (2023) 281–296.
[37] C. Ouyang, S. Hu, F. Long, S. Shi, Z. Yu, K. Zhao, Z. You, J. Pi, B. Xing, A semantic 
vector map-based approach for aircraft positioning in GNSS/GPS denied large-scale 
environment, Defence Technol. 34 (2024) 1–10.
[38] M.S. Braasch, Inertial navigation systems, in: A.V. Nebylov, J. Watson (Eds.), 
Aerospace Navigation Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2016, 1–25, https://doi.
org/10.1002/9781119163060.
[39] E.S.S. Oda, S.F. Nafea, et al., Integrated INS/GNSS navigation systems: a compre-
hensive review of ﬁltering and AI-based fusion techniques, Suez Canal Eng. Energy 
Environ. Sci. 3 (3) (2025) 17–30.
[40] D. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Ben, P. Dai, J. Wang, Underwater terrain-matching algorithm 
based on improved iterative closest contour point algorithm, Meas. Control (2024) 
00202940231224569.
[41] D. Vaman, TRN history, trends and the unused potential, 2012 IEEE/AIAA 31st Dig-
ital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC), IEEE, (2012) 1A3–1.
[42] I. Jarraya, M. Abdelkader, K. Gabr, M.B. Kadri, F. Alahmed, W. Boulila, A. Koubaa, 
OS-RFODG: open-source ROS2 framework for outdoor UAV dataset generation, Re-
sults Eng. (2025) 106613.
[43] Ericsii, FAST_LIO_ROS2: ROS2 version of FAST_LIO2, 2025, (https://github.com/
Ericsii/FAST_LIO_ROS2). GitHub repository, accessed 2025-10-27.
[44] W. Xu, F. Zhang, Fast-lio: a fast, robust lidar-inertial odometry package by 
tightly-coupled iterated kalman ﬁlter, IEEE Rob. Autom. Lett. 6 (2) (2021) 3317–
3324.
[45] W. Lee, P. Geneva, C. Chen, G. Huang, MINS: eﬃcient and robust multisensor-aided 
inertial navigation system, J. Field Rob. 42 (7) (2025) 3252–3284.
[46] T. Chen, C. Guestrin, XGBoost: a scalable tree boosting system, in: Proceedings of 
the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining, KDD ’16, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2016, 
p. 785-794. https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785
Results in Engineering 29 (2026) 108279 
15 
=== END ===
