warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1393.pdf
sha256: B7747EE545D5D66191E389C3C2E6A018BD84AD642691263CC051E93A005B94CD
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 38
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Academic Editor: Yongzhao Hua
Received: 8 December 2025
Revised: 14 January 2026
Accepted: 15 January 2026
Published: 20 January 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Article
ST-DCL: A Spatio-Temporally Decoupled Cooperative
Localization Method for Dynamic Drone Swarms
Hao Wu, Zhangsong Shi, Zhonghong Wu
, Huihui Xu
and Zhiyong Tu *
Naval University of Engineering, Wuhan 430033, China; 2420241045@nue.edu.cn (H.W.);
0909061021@nue.edu.cn (Z.S.); yizhousan@163.com (Z.W.); xuhuihui@whu.edu.cn (H.X.)
* Correspondence: 2012301650022@whu.edu.cn
Highlights
What are the main findings?
•
We establish a novel differential equation model that rigorously quantifies the joint
impact of abrupt kinematic changes and network connectivity on spatio-temporal
error propagation in dynamic drone swarms, providing a predictive error bound.
•
We propose ST-DCL, a cooperative localization framework that innovatively integrates
a Dynamic Weighted MDS optimizer and a Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Network,
achieving closed-loop spatio-temporal error decoupling and suppression.
What are the implications of the main findings?
•
The proposed framework provides a theoretically grounded and provably convergent
localization system for highly dynamic and NLOS-prone environments, enhancing
the reliability of drone swarms in GPS-denied missions.
•
ST-DCL demonstrates a 21% improvement in normalized localization error over state-
of-the-art optimization methods (MDS, FC-MDS, dwMDS, and vMDS) in simulations.
More importantly, it significantly outperforms deep learning baselines (e.g., ST-GAT)
in out-of-distribution real-world tests, demonstrating superior generalization and
robustness. This indicates strong potential for reliable deployment in search and
rescue, surveillance, and other autonomous swarm applications.
Abstract
In GPS-denied environments, the spatio-temporal coupling of errors caused by dynamic
network topologies poses a fundamental challenge to cooperative localization, presenting
existing methods with a dilemma: approaches pursuing global optimization lack dynamic
adaptability, while those focusing on local adaptation struggle to guarantee global conver-
gence. To address this challenge, this paper proposes ST-DCL, a cooperative localization
framework based on a novel principle of closed-loop spatio-temporal decoupling. The
core of ST-DCL comprises two modules: a Dynamic Weighted Multidimensional Scaling
(DW-MDS) optimizer, responsible for providing a globally consistent coarse estimate with
provable convergence, and a specially designed Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Network
(ST-GNN) corrector, tasked with compensating for local nonlinear errors. The DW-MDS
effectively suppresses interference from historical errors via an adaptive sliding window
and confidence weights derived from our error propagation model. The key innovation of
the ST-GNN lies in its two newly designed components: a Dynamic Topological Attention
Module for actively modulating neighbor aggregation to inhibit spatial error diffusion, and
a Dilated Causal Convolution Module for modeling long-term temporal dependencies to
curb error accumulation. These two modules form a closed loop via a confidence feedback
Drones 2026, 10, 69
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.2]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
2 of 38
mechanism, working in synergy to achieve continuous error suppression. Theoretical
analysis indicates that the framework exhibits bounded-error convergence under dynamic
topologies. In simulations involving 200 nodes, velocities up to 50 m/s, and 15% NLOS
links, the ST-DCL achieves a normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) of 0.0068, rep-
resenting a 21% performance improvement over state-of-the-art methods. The practical
efficacy and real-time capability are further validated through real-world flight experiments
with a 10-UAV swarm in complex, GPS-denied scenarios.
Keywords: drone swarm cooperative localization; dynamic topology; NLOS error;
spatio-temporal graph neural network
1. Introduction
Drone swarms are of great irreplaceable value in GPS-denied scenarios such as post-
disaster search and rescue and regional surveillance. As a key enabling technique for deliv-
ering autonomous formation control, cooperative localization plays a direct and decisive
role in the efficacy of swarms during missions through its accuracy and stability. However,
the dynamic topological evolution of networks arises from the high-speed maneuvering
of nodes and masking in complex environments and leads to the strong coupling effect of
ranging error, including nonlinear accumulation in the temporal dimension and multi-hop
diffusion in the spatial dimension [1]. For this reason, some conventional methods face a
dual challenge: localization diffusion and real-time performance collapse.
This paper is intended to address three key problems in the cooperative localization of
drone swarms under dynamic topology as follows: a. dynamic topology representation
involves the time-varying characteristic of neighborhood relations, which is caused by
node maneuvering and link masking, so that the traditional static graph model completely
fails in this case [2]; b. error coupling mechanism is characterized by the joint effect of non-
line-of-sight (NLOS) bias and abrupt motion change, which causes the error to accumulate
exponentially along the time axis and diffuse through the network topology space [3];
c. feasibility of decoupling depends on whether the spatio-temporally entangled error
can be separated and its convergence controlled, which affects the intrinsic stability of the
localization system.
The existing research methods have some fundamental limitations. Centralized al-
gorithms (e.g., multidimensional scaling, MDS) rely on factorization of the global static
distance matrix, and their calculation of O(N3) is too complicated to cope with real-time
topological changes. Moreover, they are extremely sensitive to single NLOS errors [4]. Filter
methods (e.g., extended Kalman filter, EKF) are advantageous in terms of distribution but
are prone to diffusion in high-speed maneuvering scenarios because of their sensitivity to
nonlinear/non-Gaussian noises [5]. Graph optimization models (e.g., g2o) have included
robustness as a constraint but depend too much on initial estimates and fail to guarantee
convergence during abrupt topological changes [6]. Deep learning models (e.g., Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCN) and Graph Attention Networks (GAT)), which have be-
come popular in recent years, can capture the association between nodes but generally
neglect spatio-temporal dynamic relations, meaning they are unable to interpret theories in
a rigorous sense [7]. It should be noted that all of these techniques do not achieve explicit
mathematical mapping between dynamic topology and localization error, let alone provide
proof of convergence.
In order to overcome the above problems, this paper presents ST-DCL, a Spatio-
Temporally Decoupled Cooperative Localization method. The core of the proposed ST-DCL
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.3]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
3 of 38
framework is the innovative integration of a Dynamic Weighted Multidimensional Scaling
(DW-MDS) optimizer and a Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Network (ST-GNN) architecture.
In this scheme, a spatio-temporal coupling equation for error propagation is first created
under dynamic topology to rigorously derive the upper bound of the error. Based on this
model, the DW-MDS optimizer is conceived to attenuate the propagation of historical errors
by virtue of an adaptive sliding window mechanism and to block the spatial diffusion path
by confidence weight. Subsequently, it is theoretically proven that this optimizer converges
within a compact convex set to the global optimal solution at a linear rate. Within the ST-
DCL framework, the ST-GNN integrates a dynamic topological attention mechanism and
dilated causal convolution in an innovative way to further capture the local nonlinear effect
of abrupt topological changes. The dynamic topological attention mechanism adjusts the
neighbor aggregation weight in an adaptive fashion to suppress spatial diffusion, while the
dilated causal convolution introduces long-term time series dependence into the modeling
to halt error accumulation. A confidence feedback mechanism is borrowed to connect the
DW-MDS with the ST-GNN and form a closed-loop control system of error suppression. It
is revealed through strict analysis that the residual error correction generated by the ST-
GNN converges to a bounded neighborhood on the basis of probability when the algebraic
connectivity meets the derived threshold. The key innovation of this paper is reflected in
four aspects as follows:
1. We articulate the intrinsic dilemma between global consistency and local adapt-
ability in dynamic swarm cooperative localization. Grounded in this perspective, a novel
differential equation model is established to elucidate the joint impact of abrupt node
maneuvering and network algebraic connectivity on spatio-temporal error propagation.
This provides a theoretical foundation and a predictive error bound for the subsequent
algorithm design.
2. We propose the ST-DCL framework, whose core innovation lies in a closed-loop
spatio-temporal decoupling architecture. Via a confidence-aware feedback loop, it or-
ganically integrates a global Dynamic Weighted MDS (DW-MDS) optimizer with a local
Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Network (ST-GNN) corrector, achieving the targeted and
synergistic suppression of the diverging spatial and temporal error components.
3. Theory-Guided Algorithmic Design with Component-Level Innovations:
DW-MDS Optimizer: Designed by integrating an adaptive temporal sliding window
and dynamic spatial confidence weights, its update mechanism is directly linked to the
derived error model. This design ensures convergence to a stable solution at a linear rate
even under time-varying topologies.
ST-GNN Corrector: Its architecture features two newly designed dedicated com-
ponents: (i) a Dynamic Topological Attention Module that actively regulates neighbor
aggregation based on real-time link reliability to block spatial error diffusion, and (ii) a
Dilated Causal Convolution Module that captures multi-scale temporal dependencies to
mitigate error accumulation. This structure is a direct computational embodiment of the
error suppression strategy inferred from our theoretical model.
4. We provide rigorous convergence analysis for both core modules. Extensive simula-
tions under challenging conditions (e.g., high dynamics, NLOS) validate the framework’s
effectiveness, demonstrating consistent performance gains over baseline methods. Beyond
simulations, real-world flight experiments with a 10-UAV swarm confirm its practical
deployability and superior accuracy in GPS-denied environments, achieving real-time
performance on onboard embedded processors.
The core contribution of this work lies in a closed-loop spatio-temporal decoupling
architecture based on confidence feedback, addressing the dilemma between global consis-
tency and local adaptability under dynamic topology. Unlike existing hybrid methods that
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.4]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
4 of 38
often treat learning modules as black-box enhancers, the proposed ST-DCL connects the
global optimizer (DW-MDS) and the local corrector (ST-GNN) into a closed-loop system
via confidence feedback derived from the error propagation model. This design aims to
achieve the synergistic suppression of spatio-temporal error components and provides a
theoretical analysis framework for convergence under dynamic topology, complementing
existing methods in terms of interpretability and convergence guarantees.
The structure of this paper is as follows: Section 2 outlines the relevant works. Section 3
elaborates on a mathematical model for dynamic topology and error propagation. The
principles followed in the design of the DW-MDS optimizer and the ST-GNN are detailed in
Section 4. Section 5 presents a systematic validation experiment and comparative analysis.
Section 6 gives a critical discussion on the limitations and prospects of the work and sums
up the achievements and future focuses of the research.
2. Relevant Works
Cooperative localization, as a key technique supporting drone swarms in GPS-denied
environments, has evolved and integrated with other techniques in three aspects, that
is, optimization theory, state estimation, and data learning. Nevertheless, there are main
challenges still being encountered in its research, including dynamic topology, non-line-of-
sight (NLOS) error, and the spatio-temporal coupling effect. This section gives a systematic
description of key methods in the domain of cooperative localization and particularly
expounds their theoretical bases, applicability, and limitations, providing an academic
background to support the proposed ST-DCL framework.
2.1. Localization Methods Based on Optimization
Optimization methods are proven to be effective at minimizing the difference be-
tween observed and estimated distances by creating an objective function in topological
static or slowly changing networks. However, their performance often plummets due to
overcomplicated computation, sensitivity to outliers, and lack of spatio-temporal decou-
pling mechanisms, while facing the dynamic topological evolution and frequent NLOS
interference caused by the high-speed maneuvering of nodes and complex environments.
Centralized optimization methods are limited to computation in global coupling. Mul-
tidimensional scaling, a classical analysis method [8], relies on the spectral decomposition
of the global distance matrix, making it difficult to satisfy the needs of real-time localization
in large networks because of the computational complexity of its O(N3). A great number
of variants from this method have been developed in an attempt to alleviate the difficulty.
Among them, vMDS [9] introduces a time smoothness constraint to cope with the abrupt
changes in node trajectories, but it fails to effectively inhibit the multi-hop diffusion of
error in the spatial dimension. In order to identify the reliability of links, dwMDS [10]
integrates space weights, but these weights are normally static or designed heuristically,
making it difficult to cope with abrupt topological changes and unexpected NLOS errors. In
FC-MDS [11], the network is assumed to be fully connected or have missing links created by
the shorted path. It resolves the problem of connectivity but overlooks different reliabilities
between links. Moreover, it is unable to resist NLOS errors and noise satisfactorily, causing
the averaging of errors in the network.
Distributed optimization methods attempt to reduce the cost of communication and
computation by virtue of local computation. Ran et al. [12] constructed a cooperative navi-
gation model based on a factor graph and adopted the sum-product algorithm for a lower
cost of communication. However, the model lacks robustness in the NLOS scenarios under
the Gaussian assumption of NLOS error. Yuhong et al. [13] put forth a method of integrat-
ing coordinate transforms and combined inertial navigation and relative observation, but
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.5]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
5 of 38
they did not fully consider the time-varying characteristic of topology, causing an absence
of spatial consistency. Han et al. [14] designed a fully covered path planning method based
on gradient descent, but its computational complexity soared with the in-creasing number
of nodes. Hence, it cannot be simply borrowed for very large swarms.
Mixed architecture is developed as an attempt to combine heuristic search and rolling
optimization, so as to ensure the efficiency and accuracy of computation at the same time.
Hu et al. [15] brought forward a dynamic discrete pigeon-inspired optimization algorithm
integrating biomimetic intelligence and model prediction control, but they did not include
a closed-loop suppression mechanism of error propagation. Wu et al. [16] developed a
hybrid localization strategy based on clustering, which adopted an optimization algorithm
for clustering. In a cluster, the improved MDS was used for centralized localization. After
that, coordinate fusion was conducted between clusters. Their work provides a promising
distributed solution for the cooperative localization of swarms in denied environments.
2.2. Dynamic System State Estimation
State estimation methods depend on system dynamics and observation models for
probability estimation to localize targets. They are mainly designed into filters and nonlin-
ear observers. Nevertheless, these methods are highly dependent on the linearity level of
the model, the assumption of noise distribution, and initial state, meaning they are prone to
performance degradation in environments with a dynamic topology and complicated noise.
Kalman filter methods, e.g., extended Kalman filter (EKF) and unscented Kalman filter
(UKF), have been widely applied in the integration of multi-source sensors. Liu et al. [17]
adopted the IMU pre-integration technique to suppress linear error, but noticeable bias
was still encountered in the attitude estimation at the time of abrupt acceleration changes.
An et al. [18] introduced a topology tracking control method based on the adaptive con-
sistency protocol, which was extremely sensitive to non-Gaussian noise. In the NLOS
environment, its error variance increases by more than 200%. Farhat et al. [19] designed a
nonlinear observer based on the Lyapunov stability theory but did not build a model for the
diffusion effect of errors in multi-hop networks, which caused an increase in localization
bias in the cooperative maneuvering of swarms.
Particle filter (PF) methods approach the posterior distribution of states by non-
parametric sampling, meaning they are applicable to highly nonlinear systems. Li et al. [20]
utilized the recursive neural network (RNN) to predict motion distribution for the improve-
ment of particle sampling efficiency. However, it is time-consuming to compute in the
resampling process, so it cannot satisfy the real-time needs of large swarms. Pan et al. [21]
developed a visual–inertial simultaneous localization and mapping (VI-SLAM) system
based on the selection of key frames, which maintained the real-time feature by lowering
computation. Nevertheless, the probability of localization failure increased dramatically
when visual features were missing.
2.3. Data-Driven Localization Model
With breakthroughs in deep learning, data-driven methods have provided a new
pattern for cooperative localization. These methods are able to automatically learn the
complicated associations of nodes, but they are highly dependent on annotated data and
are poorly explained. Moreover, they often ignore the physical constraints on systems, so
their generalization is limited if there is not sufficient data for training or the scenario is out
of distribution.
A graph neural network captures the spatial correlation between network nodes
through messaging and neighborhood aggregation. Chen et al. [22] presented a graph
convolution network (GCN) that aggregated the neighborhood information by virtue of
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.6]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
6 of 38
Laplace smoothing but could not cope with the topological relations of dynamic changes.
Ramezani et al. [23] developed a Graph Attention Network (GAT) with an adaptive neigh-
borhood weight mechanism, but the GAT had a computational complexity and was trou-
bled by a significant time delay when lots of nodes were involved. Dai et al. [24] applied
the Transformer architecture to the graph structure data, which could build a model with
long-term dependence, but failed to effectively integrate the dynamic features of time
and space. Therefore, there was a large prediction error in the high-speed maneuvering
of swarms.
In recent years, hybrid frameworks combining learning and optimization have become
a research focus in the frontier. Zhu et al. [25] put forth Graph VSLAM to embed GNN into
factor graphs for optimization, which enhanced its capability of judging data associations.
Bo et al. [26] integrated neural radiation field and state estimation in a NeuSEF framework
to strengthen its adaptability to complicated environments. Even so, these methods still
face some severe limitations: a. the system is still characterized by “black box” on the
whole because there is no explicit modeling for the spatio-temporal coupling mechanism of
error; b. its potential in practical applications is limited due to excessive dependence on
massive annotated data and the extreme high cost of track–range joint annotation for real
dynamic swarms.
Above all, the existing methods for cooperative localization are clearly unable to
satisfactorily cope with three challenges including dynamic topology, NLOS error, and
spatio-temporal coupling. The optimization methods may be well-developed but weakly
adaptable. The state estimation methods are easy to diffuse and highly hypothesized. The
data-driven methods lack a theoretical guarantee and capability of generalization. The
ST-DCL framework proposed in this paper is built upon the pioneering integration of
dynamic system theory, graph optimization, and deep learning. It is intended to construct
a provably convergent cooperative localization system that is mathematically explain-
able, dynamically adaptable, and highly robust, addressing the limitations of the isolated
approaches reviewed in this section.
3. System Model and Problem Description
In this section, a mathematical model is established for the cooperative localization of
drone swarms under dynamic topology to elucidate the spatio-temporal coupling mech-
anism of the ranging error in GNSS-denied environments and provide the theoretical
support for subsequent algorithm design. We systematically address the following key
questions after defining the dynamic network model, quantifying the regularity of error
propagation, and formulating the optimization objective function:
Dynamic topology characterization: How can a model be built for the topological
time-varying characteristics of networks arising from the high-speed maneuvering of nodes
and communication masking?
Error coupling mechanism: How does the ranging error have nonlinear accumulation
in the spatial and temporal dimensions and cause localization diffusion?
Decoupling feasibility: Is there any separable error propagation model for the stability
control of cooperative localization?
3.1. Construction of a Network Model
Firstly, the dynamic graph model is characterized. In order to accurately outline the
spatio-temporal evolution characteristics of highly maneuverable drone swarms, a network
is modeled as a time-discrete dynamic graph sequence G(t) = (V(t), ε(t)) in this paper.
In the sequence, the node set V(t) = {n1, . . . , nN} denotes the survived drone node at the
time t (considering the random failure of nodes); N is the cluster size; and the edge set ε(t)
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.7]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
7 of 38
is formed by the two-way ranging links between nodes, whose connection dynamically
varies with time.
Multidimensional scaling (MDS), as a classical analysis method, estimates the relative
coordinates through the spectral decomposition of the distance matrix between nodes. A
network constructed by N nodes is given, and its localization process can be formalized
as follows:
Step 1: Construct a distance matrix. The ranging matrix between nodes D ∈Rn×n is
constructed with the element dij as the observed Euclidean distance between nodes i and j.
Step 2: Bi-centralize. The bi-centralization matrix B = −1
2JD(2)J is calculated with
J = I −1
neeT as the centralization matrix, D(2) as the distance matrix after squaring the
element, and e as the ones vector.
Step 3: Perform eigenvalue decomposition. Eigenvalue decomposition is carried out
for the matrix B as follows:
B = UΛUT
(1)
where U denotes the eigenvector matrix, and Λ is the diagonal matrix including the
eigenvalues of B. The first k largest eigenvalues (k = 2 or 3, representing the 2D/3D space,
respectively) and their eigenvectors are taken to obtain the coordinate matrix of nodes:
X = UkΛ1/2
k
(2)
The model performs well with static wireless sensor networks [1], but it has three
innate defects as follows: a. the static assumption is invalid. It requires a constant distance
matrix D, which does not match with the time-varying ranging data from the high-speed
motion of nodes; b. high sensitivity to anomalies. A single NLOS ranging error may trigger
a butterfly effect on matrix decomposition; c. lack of spatio-temporal correlation. The
motion continuity constraint of nodes is not utilized, which causes a lack of smoothness in
track estimation.
Compared with the traditional static graph models, the model includes the following
key characteristics for dynamic adaptability:
Definition 1 (dynamic topology constraint). At any time t, the communication link between
nodes satisfies
eij(t) ∈ε(t) ⇔


xi(t) −xj(t)


 ≤Rc · ξij(t)
(3)
where xi(t) ∈R3 indicates the coordinates of the 3D position of the node i at the time t; Rc is the
maximum communication radius at the ideal line of sight (LOS); ξij(t) ∼Bernoulli(pLOS(t)) rep-
resents the link-masking state (which is LOS for ξ = 1 or NLOS for ξ < 1). The model uses
time-varying probability pLOS(t) to reflect the coupling effect of electromagnetic interference and
terrain masking. It gets closer to the actual situation than the fixed NLOS probability adopted in
the existing studies. In real-world networks, communication links can suffer from intermittent
disruptions due to physical obstructions or interference. Our model treats the link state ξij(t) as a
stochastic process that evolves over time. The sliding window mechanism in DW-MDS enables the
system to leverage temporal redundancy when partial observations are missing. Meanwhile, the
dynamic attention weight αt
ij in the ST-GNN (see Equation (28) for details) adjusts in real time
based on the historical quality of the link. When a link is interrupted, its corresponding attention
weight is automatically attenuated, and the system then relies on multi-hop information propagation
to maintain positioning.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.8]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
8 of 38
Secondly, a model is built for ranging error coupling. The data link of drones provides the
observed relative range between nodes edij(t), and its error can be decomposed into
edij(t) = ∥xi(t) −xj(t)∥
|
{z
}
real distance
+
ϵNLOS(t)
|
{z
}
NLOS deviation
+
ϵnoise(t)
|
{z
}
measurement noise
(4)
where ϵNLOS(t) ∼N (0, σ2
NLOS) is the bias caused by NLOS and is subject to zero-mean-value
Gaussian distribution, and ϵnoise(t) ∼N (0, σ2
n) is the measurement noise of hardware and is
also subject to zero-mean-value Gaussian distribution. It should be noted that the Bernoulli-based
NLOS masking model and the zero-mean Gaussian bias assumption are a tractable simplification
for theoretical derivation and initial algorithm design. In practical environments, non-line-of-sight
(NLOS) errors typically exhibit non-Gaussian, heavy-tailed, or time-varying biased characteris-
tics [27]. The Gaussian noise assumption adopted in this paper is a common theoretical simplification
intended to facilitate theoretical analysis and preliminary simulation verification. However, the core
algorithmic components of the proposed framework—namely, the Huber loss function within the
Distributed Weighted Multidimensional Scaling (DW-MDS) and the dynamic topological attention
mechanism in the Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Network (ST-GNN)—are specifically designed to
enhance robustness against non-ideal errors, including outliers and time-varying biases. Subsequent
real-world flight tests (Section 6) will be conducted in highly realistic, complex electromagnetic
and topographical conditions to directly evaluate the framework’s capability to mitigate actual
NLOS errors.
Definition 2 (dynamic ranging constraint). In the time window [t −T, t], the observation set
of the node pair (i, j) satisfies
DT
ij =
n
edij(τ)
τ ∈[t −T, t], edij(τ) ≤Rc
o
(5)
where the length of the window T is adjusted and adapted to the maximum acceleration of the nodes:
T =

Rc
∥amax∥· ∆t2

(6)
where amax is the maximum acceleration vector of drones, and ∆t denotes the discrete time step
length. This design ensures that the time relevance of ranging data can effectively reflect the
maneuvering characteristics of nodes and avoid the motion information loss attributed to the fixed
window length. It will be elaborate further.
3.2. Analysis of Error Coupling Mechanism
In drone swarms under dynamic topology, the spatio-temporal coupling effect of the
ranging error is characterized by nonlinear accumulation in the temporal dimension and
multi-hop diffusion in the spatial dimension, as shown in Figure 1. In this section, random
process analysis and network flow theory are adopted to prudently prove two key aspects
as follows:
(1) Accumulation effect on time
We define the localization error of nodes as δi(t) =∥ˆxi(t) −xi(t) ∥, where ˆxi(t) is the
estimated position of the node i and xi(t) is the real position of i. The evolution of the
localization error satisfies the following recursive equation:
δ(t) = α(∆v) · δ(t −1) + β ·
r
E
h
b2
ij(t)
i
+ γ · n(t)
(7)
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.9]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
9 of 38
where α(∆v) is the velocity coupling coefficient, α(∆v) = 1
2

1 + tanh
 ∥∆v∥−vth
σv

. Here,
vth is the threshold velocity change that triggers significant error amplification, and σv is
the scale parameter controlling the smoothness of the transition from normal to amplified
error accumulation. This function represents the amplification of error accumulation
by the abrupt change in velocity at the node ∆v = v(t) −v(t −1); E
h
b2
ij(t)
i
stands for
the term of NLOS deviation, E
h
b2
ij(t)
i
= B2
max · pNLOS(t), which reflects the squared
enhancement of the ranging error by the density of masking in the environment. Moreover,
pNLOS(t) stands for the probability or proportion of the communication path between
nodes subject to NLOS at time t, Bmax indicates the maximum ranging deviation subject
to NLOS, and bij(t) represents the ranging error of the node i and the node j at time
t; n(t) ∼N(0, 1) is a standard normal random variable representing the normalized
measurement noise. The coefficient β is the equivalent propagation coefficient for the
NLOS deviation, a dimensionless constant that quantifies the average amplification of a
single NLOS ranging error into the node localization error. The coefficient γ is the standard
deviation of the measurement noise ϵnoise(t) (as defined in Equation (4)), scaling n(t) to its
actual magnitude.
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of spatio-temporal error coupling and propagation mechanism under
dynamic topology.
Theorem 1 (upper bound of error accumulation): In the drone swarms under dy-
namic topology, the upper bound of node localization error accumulation in the temporal
dimension satisfies
δ(t) ≤δ(0) ·
t
∏
k=1
α(k) +
t
∑
k=1

β · Bmax ·
q
pNLOS (k) + γ

·
t
∏
m=k+1
α(m)
(8)
The proof is detailed in Appendix A. The recursive equation is expanded by mathe-
matical induction and combined with Holder inequality to obtain the upper bound of the
accumulation error index. When α(t) ≥1 (i.e., high-speed maneuvering), the error tends to
diffuse. This verifies the root cause of the failure of the traditional localization algorithms
under dynamic topology.
(2) Spatial diffusion effect
For the drone swarms under dynamic topology, the spatial diffusion effect must refer
to the phenomenon that the localization error of a single node is propagated level by
level through a multi-hop communication link in the network. This must be rooted in the
dependence of cooperative localization, that is, each node relies on the estimated position
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.10]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
10 of 38
of neighboring nodes to resolve and determine its own position. If the node i has an error
δi(t) arising from NLOS or high-speed maneuvering, this state of error will be propagated
in the following ways:
1⃝Direct propagation: The error of i deforms its measured distance from the direct
neighbor j, that is, dij(t), which results in the localization bias of j:
δj(t) = γij · δi(t −1) + ϵj(t)
(9)
where γij =
wij(t)
∑
k∈Ni(t)
wik(t) is the normalized propagation coefficient, and wij(t) is the
confidence weight of the link.
2⃝Multi-hop cascade: After the error diffuses through k hops, its upper bound of the
node m is as follows:
δm(t + k) ≤γk
n · δi(t) + ϵmax
1 −γn

1 −γk
n

(10)
where γn = E

γij

is the average connectivity of the network, and ϵmax = Bmax√pNLOS is
the largest single-hop error.
Dynamic topology increases the uncertainty of diffusion. The maneuvering of nodes
leads to the time variation in neighbor set Ni(t), causing the asymmetric path of propa-
gation (e.g., errors aggregate towards the center of a formation at the time of centripetal
movement). In the NLOS environment, ϵmax is increased to speed up diffusion. For this
purpose, an algorithm is required to simultaneously suppress the generation of errors (e.g.,
robustness optimization in DW-MDS) and block the path of propagation (e.g., topological
attention mechanism in the ST-GNN).
3.3. Modeling of the Mathematical Problem
This section is intended to transform the problem of cooperative localization under
dynamic topology into a calculable optimization model and then resolve two key contra-
dictions: a. the contradiction between measurement accuracy and dynamic adaptability. A
traditional static optimization model cannot adapt to the abrupt change in the observation
matrix under the time variation in topology; b. the contradiction between error suppression
and computation efficiency. It is required to suppress spatio-temporal coupling errors and
ensure the real-time constraint on drone platforms at the same time. For the above intention,
a spatio-temporal joint optimization framework is therefore constructed as follows:
Firstly, an objective function is developed. After integrating the characteristics of
dynamic topology and the principles of error coupling, a multi-objective optimization
function is created as follows:
min
X(t)
t
∑
τ=t−T
∑
(i,j)∈E(τ)
ρ

edij(τ) −


ˆxi(τ) −ˆxj(τ)




|
{z
}
Dynamic distance fitting term
+λ1
N
∑
i=1
t
∑
τ=t−T+1
∥∆ˆxi(τ)∥TV
|
{z
}
Trajectory total variation constraint
+λ2
t
∑
τ=t−T
tr(L(τ)Σ(τ))
|
{z
}
Covariance propagation suppression term
(11)
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.11]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
11 of 38
where X(t) is the position set of all nodes in the time window [t −T, t]. As for the
dynamic distance fitting term, the localization accuracy is optimized under dynamic
topology by minimizing the deviation of the measured distance from the distance between
estimated positions, while the Huber loss function ρ(·) is adopted to inhibit the NLOS
outliers. As for the trajectory’s total variation [28] constraint, the continuity of node motion
(∆ˆxi(τ) = ˆxi(τ) −ˆxi(τ −1)) is guaranteed by regularizing the total variation, while λ1
is the regularization coefficient used to control the weight of trajectory smoothness. As
for the covariance propagation suppression term, the spectral characteristic of Laplacian
matrix L is utilized to confine the upper bound of propagation for the error covariance
matrix L, while λ2 is the regularization coefficient used to control the weight of covariance
propagation suppression.
Secondly, a model is built under constraints to ensure that the solution space of
the optimization problem is practically applicable to the systems. Compared with the
traditional problems of localization, special attention should be paid to three key constraints
under dynamic topology as follows:
1⃝Communication topology constraint:


ˆxi(τ) −ˆxj(τ)


 > Rc ⇒(i, j) /∈E(τ), ∀τ ∈[t −T, t]
(12)
where Rc is the radius of communication; E(τ) is the edge set at the time τ, which satisfies
the adjacency matrix A(τ) =

aij(τ)

with αij= 1 if, and only if, (i, j) ∈E(τ). This
constraint requires the optimizer to satisfy the time variation in communication topology at
the time of solving the position of nodes. When the distance between two nodes exceeds Rc,
its ranging link immediately fails (αij= 0) so as to prevent the algorithm from erroneously
using the outdated observation.
2⃝Kinematic constraint:
(
∥vi(τ)∥≤vmax
∥ai(τ)∥≤amax
, vi(τ) = ˆxi(τ) −ˆxi(τ −1)
∆τ
(13)
where vmax is the maximum cruising velocity; amax is the maximum acceleration; and amax
is the discrete time step length. This constraint guarantees that the solved node trajectories
match the dynamic features of drones so that the algorithm will not generate the estimated
positions beyond the capacity of the drones.
3⃝Error diffusion constraint:
tr(Σ(t)) ≤δ2
max · N
(14)
where Σ(t) is the error covariance matrix at time t; δmax is the maximum RMS error allowed
by a single node; and N is the total number of nodes in a swarm. By restricting the trajectory
of the global error covariance matrix, this constraint prevents the exponential diffusion of
localization errors in the networks. Therefore, it is essentially the application of Lyapunov
stability in the problem of localization to ensure that a system can still converge to the
bounded region regardless of disturbances.
4. Spatio-Temporal Decoupling Cooperative Localization
In order to overcome the problem of localization diffusion caused by the spatio-
temporal coupling error under dynamic topology, this paper proposes ST-DCL, a Spatio-
Temporally Decoupled Cooperative Localization method with algebraic connectivity-
guided closed-loop feedback. The core of the ST-DCL framework is the cooperative
operation of a Dynamic Weighted Multidimensional Scaling (DW-MDS) optimizer and a
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.12]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
12 of 38
Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Network (ST-GNN) corrector. The DW-MDS optimizer is
dedicated to efficient coarse localization and primary spatio-temporal decoupling at the
global level, while the ST-GNN corrector focuses on nonlinear error compensation and
spatio-temporal dependence modeling at the local level. These two components are inter-
connected via an innovative confidence feedback mechanism, driving a closed-loop system
that reinforces their mutual performance, thereby constituting a theoretically grounded
and provably convergent estimation framework. The overall architecture is illustrated in
Figure 2.
Figure 2. Overall framework of the ST-DCL algorithm.
4.1. Framework of Dynamic Weighted Multidimensional Scaling (DW-MDS)
Traditional multidimensional scaling (MDS) methods are based on the static decomposi-
tion of a global distance matrix, so they cannot adapt to the abrupt changes in the observation
matrix arising from dynamic topology. For this reason, a Dynamic Weighted MDS (DW-
MDS) framework is proposed as a core component of ST-DCL to deliver spatio-temporal
decoupling through a sliding window mechanism and adaptive weight assignment.
The DW-MDS manages error propagation through dual temporal and spatial weight-
ing mechanisms. The adaptive sliding window mechanism (Equations (15) and (16)) assigns
higher weights to recent observations via exponential decay, aiming to reduce the influence
of outdated erroneous estimates on the current state, thereby mitigating temporal error
accumulation. The adaptive spatial confidence weights (Equations (17) and (18)) dynami-
cally adjust the contribution of each ranging measurement based on link type (LOS/NLOS)
and packet loss rate, aiming to weaken the spatial diffusion of errors caused by unreliable
links. Together, they provide attenuation paths for error propagation in both temporal and
spatial dimensions.
4.1.1. Sliding Window Mechanism
In this design, attention is paid to resolving the problem of error accumulation caused
by outdated historical data under dynamic topology. The weight of exponential attenuation
is assigned as follows:
w(τ) = e−η(t−τ), τ ∈[t −T, t]
(15)
where the attenuation factor η is negatively correlated with the error accumulation rate α,
that is, η = 1/α, so that the weight of historical data is ensured to attenuate with the error
propagation. Among them, the adaptive window length is set to
T =

2Rc
amax∆t2

(16)
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.13]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
13 of 38
where the window length T is based on kinematic constraints, representing the theoret-
ical minimum time required for a UAV to accelerate from a standstill to a displacement
exceeding the communication radius [29].
4.1.2. Adaptive Spatial Weight Assignment
When NLOS exists under dynamic topology, the confidence weight of each link should
be dynamically adjusted to control the destructive influence of NLOS and high packet loss
links on localization accuracy. The adaptive spatial weight function is designed to quantify
the quality of links by weight:
cij(τ) =
1
1 + λ3 · NLOSij(τ) + λ4 · PLRij(τ)
(17)
where NLOSij(τ) is the mark of NLOS (whose value is 0/1), and detected by the link model
in Equation (3); PLRij(τ) is the particle loss rate; and λ3 and λ4 are coefficients, being 0.5
and 0.3, respectively. It is multiplied by the sliding window weight w(τ) to obtain the
final weight:
wij(τ) = w(τ) · cij(τ)
(18)
4.1.3. Improved Stress Function
In traditional MDS, only geometrical constraints are taken into account, and the dy-
namic characteristics of nodes are ignored. In this section, the motion smoothing constraint
is included in the MDS optimization to suppress the error propagation caused by the abrupt
change in trajectory. The stress function is defined as
σ(X) =
t
∑
τ=t−T
∑
(i,j)∈E(τ)
wij(τ)

edij(τ) −


ˆxi(τ) −ˆxj(τ)



2
|
{z
}
Dynamic distance fitting term
+ λ5
N
∑
i=1
t
∑
τ=t−T+1
∥vi(τ) −ˆvi(τ)∥2
|
{z
}
Speed smoothing constraint
(19)
where ˆvi(τ)
=
xi(τ) −xi(τ −1)
∆t
represents the estimated discrete velocity, and
λ5 = 1/
 2δ2
v

is the regularization coefficient, which is determined by the maximum
velocity error limit δv.
The improved stress function σ(X) is solved by iterative optimization to approach the
global optimal solution under dynamic constraints in the following steps:
Step 1: Initialize and construct the initial coordinate matrix X(0) based on the node
position and velocity in the output of the inertial navigation system (INS).
Step 2: Calculate the weighted distance matrix B(k) with Guttman transform, and
update it in the following rule:
B(k) = W◦
D −eD(k)
(20)
where eD(k) is the estimated distance matrix of the current iteration, and ◦represents the
Hadamard product. By virtue of matrix retraction mapping, nonlinear optimization is
transformed into a linear iteration.
Step 3: Conduct the projection update and perform the geometrical centralized up-
date. The geometrical invariability of MDS is utilized to ensure the spatial consistency
of solutions.
X(k+1) = 1
N B(k)X(k)
(21)
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.14]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
14 of 38
Step 4: Utilize velocity constraint projection to perform the projection gradient descent
of the updated coordinates:
X(k+1) ←ProjC

X(k+1)
(22)
where C = {X | ∥vi∥≤vmax} is the set of dynamic constraints. In this operation, convex
set projection is carried out to guarantee the constant existence of solutions in the feasible
domain. Above all, Algorithm 1 outlines the iterative DW-MDS optimizer. Its core steps
involve the following: computing a transformed distance matrix via the Guttman transform
(lines 3–4), updating node positions (line 5), enforcing kinematic constraints through
projection (lines 6–10), and checking for convergence (lines 12–14). The pseudo-code of the
DW-MDS algorithm is concluded as follows:
Algorithm 1. DW-MDS Algorithm
Input: Ranging observation set edij(τ), adaptive spatial weight cij(τ), temporal
attenuation weight w(τ), initial position X(0) =
n
ˆx(0)
i
o
, maximum iteration times Kmax,
convergence threshold ε, and maximum velocity constraint vmax in the current time window
Output: Estimate the optimization position X∗=

ˆx∗
i
	
1.
Initialize: k ←0, calculate the initial global weight matrix W(0)
2.
for k = 0, 1, 2, · · ·, Kmax do
3.
Guttman transform:
Based on X(k), calculate the estimated distance d(k)
ij (τ) =



 ˆx(k)
i
(τ) −ˆx(k)
j
(τ)




Calculate the transform matrix B(k) = W ◦(D −eD(k))
4.
Position update: X(k + 1) ←1
N B(k)X(k)
5.
for each node i do
6.
Calculate the estimated velocity: ˆv(k+1)
i
(τ) = ( ˆx(k+1)
i
(τ) −ˆx(k+1)
i
(τ −1))/∆t
7.
if



 ˆv(k+1)
i
(τ)



 > vmax then
8.
ˆv(k+1)
i
(τ) ←ˆv(k+1)
i
(τ) · (vmax/



 ˆv(k+1)
i
(τ)



)
9.
Rectify the position ˆx(k+1)
i
(τ) backward based on the corrected velocity ˆv(k+1)
i
(τ)
10.
end if
11.
end for
12.
if



X(k) −X(k−1)



F < ε then
13.
Bteak
14.
end if
15.
end for
16.
X∗←X(k)
17.
return X∗
4.1.4. Convergence Guarantee and Complexity Control of DW-MDS Algorithm
(1) Convergence of the algorithm
Convergence theorem: While satisfying the regularization parameter λ > 1
2ρ(L) (with
ρ(·) as the spectral radius and L as the Laplacian matrix), the improved stress function
σ(X) has an exclusive global minimum on the compact convex set C = {X | ∥vi∥≤vmax}.
Moreover, the DW-MDS iteration algorithm converges at a linear rate to the solution.
Proof (of convergence theorem). Step 1: Construct a Hessian matrix. The Hessian matrix
of the improved stress function σ(X) is as follows:
H = 2(W ⊗I3) + λ(L ⊗I3)
(23)
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.15]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
15 of 38
where W ∈RTN×TN is the block diagonalized dynamic weight matrix; L ∈RTN×TN is the
expanded graph Laplacian matrix; and I3 is the 3D unit matrix.
Step 2: Prove the positive definiteness. For any non-zero vector z ∈R3TN, we have
zTHz = 2zT(W ⊗I3)z + λzT(L ⊗I3)z
(24)
Since W is a diagonal dominance matrix and L is semi-definite, H is positively definite
when λ > 1
2ρ(L).
Step 3:
Apply the Banach fixed-point theorem and define the mapping
Φ(X) = ProjC
 1
N BX

. Its Lipschitz constant γ satisfies
γ = ρ(W) + λ
2 ρ(L)
N
< 1
(25)
According to the Banach theorem, the iteration X(k+1) = Φ

X(k)
must converge to
an exclusive fixed point.
Conclusion: The improved stress function σ(X) is strongly convex on the compact
convex set C. The DW-MDS algorithm converges linearly at a rate of O

γk
.
The convergence condition requires the regularization parameter to satisfy λ > ρ(L)/2.
In practice, ρ(L) is not known a priori and varies with the dynamic topology. Therefore,
we employ a practical strategy by setting λ = η1 · ˆρ, where ˆρ is a conservative estimate of
the spectral radius based on the average node degree, and η1 is a safety factor greater than
1 (set to η1 = 1.5 in our simulations to ensure λ > ρ(L)/2 under varying conditions). □
(2) Complexity of the algorithm
The computational complexity of the DW-MDS framework has three dominant parts:
a. complexity of dynamic weight update O
 TN2
, which needs to traverse the links in
the window at all times (T×
E(τ)
 ≈TN2 operations in total); b. complexity of Guttman
transform O
 TN2
, which is mainly intended to complete the computation of TN2 float-
ing points involved in the weighted distance matrix B; and c. complexity of projection
gradient descent O(N), which mainly executes the mapping to the velocity of each node
(computation of N vector norms). The total time complexity is as follows:
Ctotal = O

TN2
+ O

TN2
+ O(N) = O

TN2
(26)
Compared with the complexity of traditional MDS O
 N3
, the computational effi-
ciency is improved by 1–2 magnitudes when T≪N (typical value T ≈10, N ≥100).
4.2. Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Network (ST-GNN)
The DW-MDS framework delivers global coarse localization but is limited by its
sliding window mechanism and struggles to capture the nonlinear propagation of local
errors arising from abrupt topological changes. Therefore, the Spatio-Temporal Graph
Neural Network (ST-GNN) is proposed as the second core component of ST-DCL, serving
as a local correction module that works in mutual compensation with the DW-MDS. Its key
innovations include dynamic spatio-temporal attention (adaptively fusing heterogeneous
spatio-temporal features to address the over-smoothing problem of traditional GNNs),
dilated causal convolution (modeling long-term time series dependence to suppress the
butterfly effect of error accumulation), and a confidence feedback mechanism (feeding
local corrections back to the DW-MDS to achieve closed-loop optimization). The overall
structure of the ST-GNN is presented in Figure 3.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.16]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
16 of 38
Figure 3. Overall structure of the ST-GNN.
The ST-GNN designed in this paper differs from standard Spatio-Temporal Graph
Neural Networks, primarily in its components tailored to dynamic swarm localization. The
dynamic spatio-temporal attention module (Section 4.2.1) explicitly incorporates relative
kinematic features (relative velocity) and link confidence into the attention weight calcu-
lation, enabling it to respond to topology changes and link reliability variations caused
by maneuvers beyond mere node feature similarity. The choice of dilated causal convo-
lution (Section 4.2.2) over recurrent neural networks (RNNs) or temporal self-attention
is mainly based on two considerations: first, its deterministic receptive field can cover
long time spans, facilitating alignment with the time scale of error accumulation; second,
its feedforward computation structure is more amenable to parallel processing, which is
beneficial for meeting the determinism and low-latency requirements of UAV onboard
computing platforms.
4.2.1. Dynamic Spatio-Temporal Attention Layer
This layer addresses the problem of inaccurate feature aggregation caused by time-
varying neighbor relationships under dynamic topology, enhancing robustness against
sudden link disruptions.
Firstly, multimodal feature encoding must be performed as the fundamental informa-
tion processing unit for the dynamic spatio-temporal attention mechanism. Its key objective
is to integrate heterogeneous sensor data with state estimates and construct a feature space
that comprehensively describes the dynamic behavior of nodes so as to provide sufficient
information support for the subsequent calculation of spatio-temporal attention weights:
ht
i =

ˆxt
i; vt
i; δt
i; ct
i
 ∈Rd
(27)
where ˆxt
i vt
i are inherited from the output of the DW-MDS in Section 4.1 and provide the
kinematic prior; δt
i is the residual error that is the difference between the estimated position
and the output of the DW-MDS, and it is used to quantify the need for local correction; and
ct
i is the confidence level, which reflects the reliability of the DW-MDS weight matrix and is
used for gate control regulation.
Secondly, the computation of dynamic attention weights must be performed and exists
as the core decision-making unit of the dynamic spatio-temporal attention mechanism. Its
primary goal is the adaptive adjustment of information transfer intensity among neighbor-
ing nodes based on real-time topological changes and node states so as to achieve the dual
optimization of critical information enhancement and abnormal interference suppression
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.17]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
17 of 38
in the dynamic denied environment. In this section, the aggregation weights are adjusted
on the basis of relative motion features:
αt
ij = Softmax

LeakyReLU

Wa
h
ht
i



ht
j



∆vt
ij
i
(28)
where ∆vt
ij = vt
i −vt
j indicates the relative velocity between two nodes; Wa ∈Rd×3d is the
trainable weight matrix to realize nonlinear mapping in the feature space. If the nodes i
and j are separated quickly (∆vt
ij is too large) and αt
ij →0, potential abnormal links are
automatically cut off.
At last, the gate control state should be updated to dynamically balance the historical
states and neighbor information in the following process:





gt
i = σ1
 Wg

ht
i∥ct
i

ht
i = gt
i ⊙∑
j
αt
ijWhht
j +
 1 −gt
i
 ⊙ht
i
(29)
where σ1 is the Sigmoid function and its output ranges [0, 1], and ⊙is the Hadamard
product to weigh at the feature level.
4.2.2. Dilated Causal Convolution Layer
This component is designed to model long-term temporal dependencies, thereby
suppressing the exponential accumulation of errors identified in the temporal dimension
analysis (Section 3.2). Traditional time series models (e.g., RNN) often fail to capture such
long-range dependencies effectively.
Firstly, multi-scale dilated convolutions are designed to capture multi-scale temporal
patterns (instantaneous maneuvering, medium-term trend, and long-term cycle) in drone
swarm motion through convolution kernels of varying dilation factors. This design helps
address the short-sighted problem of traditional RNNs with vanishing gradients. It is
assumed that dilated convolutions exist in stacked L layers, and each layer has a dilation
factor dl = 2l−1. The dilation factor dl covers a time span corresponding to the term
α · v(t) · δ(t) in the error recursive equation in Section 3.2, meaning that the receptive field
is large enough to suppress the effect of accumulation. The time series characteristics are
extracted by the following formula:
zt,l
i
=
K−1
∑
k=0
Wdi
k · ht−k·dl
i
+ bdi
(30)
where K= 3 represents the width of the convolution kernel; dl is the dilation factor of the
lth layer (d1 = 1 for the first layer, d2 = 2 for the second layer, and d4 = 4 for the third layer).
The perceptive field is expanded exponentially (e.g., covering the time t −7 to t when the
layer is L = 3) so that the model can be built to cover the error propagation paths of seven
time steps. This overcomes the traditional RNN’s limitation of capturing dependence in
only 3–5 steps. Moreover, bdi corresponds to the bias vector of the convolution layer.
Secondly, strict causal constraints are imposed. A temporal model is built with only
historical information to satisfy the requirement for causality in the online localization of
drone swarms (future data cannot be used). The zero-fill strategy is adopted to perform
zero initialization at the time when t −k · dl < 0:
ht−k·dl
i
= 0
if t −k · dl < 0
(31)
The output series are moved leftwards by the dl position to eliminate the future risk of
information leakage and satisfy the strict causality with the output relying only on the data
[t0, t] at time t.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.18]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
18 of 38
At last, multi-level feature fusion is conducted to fuse motion features at different time
scales in an adaptive way and to enhance the ability to characterize complex maneuvering
patterns. Attention weights are calculated by
βm = Softmax

Wβ
h
zt,1
i ∥. . . ∥zt,L
i
i
(32)
where βm reflects the importance of dilated convolution features in the mth layer. In a
scenario of unexpected maneuvering, the weight β1 of the lower layer (dl = 1) increases.
In the scenario of cruising at a constant velocity, the weight β3 of the higher layer (dl = 4)
dominates. The output of feature fusion is as follows:
zt
i =
L
∑
m=1
βm · zt,m
i
(33)
The multi-scale time series features are dynamically integrated to make the model not
only respond to unexpected states (depending on short-term features) but also suppress
long-term error accumulation (depending on long-term features).
4.2.3. Residual Correction and Feedback Mechanism
This mechanism ensures kinematic feasibility while compensating for local errors and
feeds the correction results back to the global DW-MDS optimizer, realizing the closed-loop
error suppression that is central to the ST-DCL framework.
∆xt
i = δmax · tanh
 Wp

zt
i∥ct
i

(34)
where δmax is the maximum allowed localization bias.
Secondly, residual errors are fused under the drive of the confidence level to dynami-
cally adjust the global and local weights of localization results:
ˆxt
i = xt
i + βt
i · ∆xt
i,
βt
i = Wβct
i + bβ
(35)
where ct
i is the confidence level. The higher the confidence level ct
i ∈[0, 1], the larger the
βt
i, which implies a stronger trust in local correction. Moreover, bβ is a bias scalar used to
adjust the baseline value of the weight βt
i.
In the end, closed-loop feedback regulation is carried out to feed back the corrected
position error to the DW-MDS framework:
wt
ij ←wt
ij · exp(−γa




ˆxt
i −ˆxt
j



 −edt
ij

|
{z
}
et
ij
)
(36)
where et
ij is the ranging reconstruction error to measure the geometrical consistency af-
ter correction; γa is the feedback gain coefficient. If the corrected distance



ˆxt
i −ˆxt
j



 is
much different from the measured value edt
ij, the weight of the link is lowered to block
error propagation. Above all, the pseudo-code of the ST-GNN algorithm is presented in
Algorithm 2. Algorithm 2 details the ST-GNN correction procedure. It operates in three
phases: encoding node features and computing attention weights (lines 5–13), performing
multi-scale temporal convolution (lines 15–22), and finally, generating and applying the
confidence-weighted correction while updating the feedback (lines 24–34).
The feedback mechanism (Equation (36)) modulates the edge weights for the next
DW-MDS iteration. Stability is ensured because the feedback acts as a damping factor
rather than a driving force. The gain γa controls the sensitivity of weight reduction. If γa is
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.19]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
19 of 38
too large, it may cause topology oscillation (frequently discarding and recovering links); if
it is too small, error suppression is slow. In practice, we set γa such that weight changes do
not exceed 10% per iteration, ensuring that the global optimizer’s solution space changes
smoothly, thus preventing system divergence.
Algorithm 2. ST-GNN Algorithm
Input: DW-MDS output position X∗, estimated range observation set edij(τ), weight
matrices Wa, Wg, Wh, Wdl
k , Wp, Wβ; bias bdl, bβ; maximum bias δmax, feedback gain γa,
feature dimension d, convolution layer L, width of convolution kernel K, dilation factor
n
dl = 2l−1oL
l=1; maximum iteration times Kmax, convergence threshold ε, and
maximum velocity constraint vmax.
Output: corrected position ˆX∗=

ˆx∗
i
	
, update weight wij(t) (feed back to DW-MDS)
1.
Initialize: Initialize node features
2.
Modified for each node i and time τ ∈[t −T, t] do
3.
δi(τ) ←0
4.
hi(τ) ←[xi(τ); vi(τ); δi(τ); ci(τ)]
5.
end for
6.
for k = 0 to Kmax do
7.
for node i ∈V do
8.
Calculate neighbor attention weight αt
ij = Softmax

LeakyReLU

Wa
h
ht
i



ht
j



∆vt
ij
i
9.
Gate control update: gt
i = σ1
 Wg

ht
i∥ct
i

, mt
i = ∑
j
αt
ijWhht
j
10.
end for
11.
for node i do
12.
for l = 1to Ldo
13.
for τ = t to t −T:
14.
Time series convolution: zτ,l
i
=
K−1
∑
κ=0
Wdiκ hτ−κdl, att
i
+ bdl
15.
end for
16.
end for
17.
β = Softmax

Wβ
h
zt,1
i ∥. . . ∥zt,L
i
i
18.
zt
i =
L
∑
m=1
βmzt,m
i
19.
end for
20.
for node i ∈V
21.
Generate correction ∆xt
i = δmax · tanh
 Wp

zt
i∥ct
i

22.
Confidence fusion βt
i = Wβct
i + bβ, ˆxt
i = xt
i + βt
i · ∆xt
i
23.
Update features δi(t) = ∆xt
i, hi(t) =

ˆxt
i; vi(t); δi(t); ci(t)

24.
end for
25.
for link (i, j) ∈ε(t):
26.
εij ←|



ˆxt
i −ˆxt
j



 −edij(t)|
27.
wt
ij ←wt
ij · exp(−γa




ˆxt
i −ˆxt
j



 −edt
ij

|
{z
}
et
ij
)
28.
end for
29.
if k > 0 and





∆xt
i
	(k) −

∆xt
i
	(k−1)



F < ε
30.
Break
31.
end for
32.
return ˆX∗=

ˆx∗
i
	
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.20]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
20 of 38
4.2.4. Theoretical Performance Analysis
(1) Error correction convergence analysis
Proposition (error correction convergence). While satisfying the following conditions, the
residual error correction sequence generated by the ST-GNN

∆xt
i
	
converges by probability to the
zero neighborhood.
Stability of dynamic topology: The network connectivity satisfies λg
2(G(t)) ≥ξ > 0
(with λg
2 as the algebraic connectivity of the graph).
Ranging bounded: E
h
ϵ2
ij(t)
i
≤σmax2
Decay in learning rate:
∞
∑
k=1
ηk = ∞,
∞
∑
k=1
η2
k < ∞
Proof (of the proposition). Step 1: Define the Lyapunov function, and construct the energy
function to measure the state of the system error:
V(t) = 1
N
N
∑
i=1


∆xt
i


2 + βg · tr
 Σt
i

(37)
where Σt
i is the error covariance matrix of node i, and βg > 0 is the weight coefficient.
Step 2: Establish the recurrent relationship, and expand V(t + 1) following the residual
error update rule of the ST-GNN ∆xt+1
i
= ∆xt
i −ηt∇xiL:
E[V(t + 1) | Ft] ≤V(t) −ηt ·

αp∥∇xL∥2 + αq∥∇cL∥2
|
{z
}
Gradient descent term
+ η2
t · C1 + C2 · σmax2
(38)
where Ft is the historical information before the time t; αp and αq are the Lipschitz constant
of the gradient, respectively; and C1 and C2 are the constants of relevance to network
parameters, respectively.
Step 3: Conclude the convergence. Based on the theory of stochastic approximation, if
the learning rate satisfies Condition 3, the gradient descent term is driven by
limsup
t→∞
E
h

∆xt
i


2i
≤C2σmax2
αp + αq
(39)
In other words, the correction eventually enters the neighborhood of the radius
r =
q
C2σmax2/
 αp + αq

so as to converge by probability. □
(2) Time complexity analysis of the algorithm
The time complexity of the ST-GNN is dominated by three parts: a. dynamic
attention mechanism. The attention weight of nodes is calculated for each time step. The
complexity is O
 TNd2
, with T as the time window length, N as the number of nodes,
and d as the feature dimension (64 by default); b. dilated spatio-temporal convolution.
For the dilated convolution of L layers, the convolution kernel of the width K is executed
in each layer. The complexity is O(TLNKd), with L and K to be 3 and 3, respectively;
and c. residual error correction mapping. The position correction is generated by linear
layers. The complexity is O(Nd). The overall time complexity is O
 TNd2 + TLNKd

,
which has a linear relationship with the number of nodes N. It is significantly lower than
that of traditional methods (e.g., O
 N3
in the MDS-MAP) and supports the real-time
deployment of thousand nodes.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.21]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
21 of 38
4.2.5. Training Strategy and Generalization Capability Design
(1) Training Data Construction
The training data is sourced from the simulation environment established in Section 5
of this paper. Utilizing the motion model (Equation (40)), dynamic topology constraints
(Equation (3)), and error model (Equation (4)) within this environment, we generated
over 500 dynamic trajectory sequences. This dataset extensively covers various formation
patterns, including random distributions, linear, circular, and helical formations. The node
velocities range from 5 to 80 m per second, and random non-line-of-sight (NLOS) links with
ratios varying from 0% to 40% are incorporated. This ensures the diversity and complexity
of the training dataset.
(2) Data Augmentation Techniques
To enhance the model’s robustness against unknown disturbances and noise, multiple
data augmentation techniques are applied online during training. First, random edge
dropout is implemented, where at each training time step, edges in the adjacency matrix
are randomly masked with a probability of 15%. This simulates transient link failures
that may occur in actual communication. Second, Gaussian noise is added to the input
state information (node positions and velocities), with a standard deviation of 0.1 m for
position perturbations and 0.2 m/s for velocity perturbations, simulating uncertainties in
perception and state estimation. Finally, a mixed-noise strategy is adopted for generating
noise in ranging observations. Each training batch randomly combines Gaussian noise, uni-
formly distributed noise (simulating bounded interference), and impulse noise (simulating
occasional large errors), thereby compelling the model to learn more generalizable error
suppression features.
(3) Training Procedure and Methodology
A two-stage training strategy is employed. In the first stage, the model is pre-trained
using the mean squared error between the predicted positions and the ground-truth positions
provided by the simulation, enabling the model to learn the basic mapping for localization.
In the second stage, a joint loss function is introduced for fine-tuning. This function includes
both the mean squared error term and a smoothness regularization term based on the second-
order difference in the node’s estimated trajectory, promoting physical plausibility. The entire
training process uses the Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.001, and a cosine
annealing scheduler gradually decays the learning rate to 1 × 10−5.
(4) Generalization Capability Design
The model’s generalization capability stems from the synergy between its architectural
design and training strategy. At the architectural level, the dynamic topological attention
mechanism enables it to adaptively handle unseen network connectivity patterns, while
the multi-scale temporal convolution module ensures the ability to capture temporal
dependencies under different maneuvering modes. Regarding the training strategy, a
strict “scene isolation” principle is adopted: during training set construction, certain
complex specific formation patterns (e.g., high-speed dense interweaving maneuvers) are
deliberately excluded. These reserved scenarios are used exclusively for final testing,
thereby enabling rigorous evaluation of the model’s zero-shot generalization capability.
This design establishes a solid foundation for transferring the algorithm from the simulation
environment to subsequent real-world flight tests.
5. Simulation Analysis
In order to verify the effectiveness of the ST-DCL method proposed in this paper, tests
were conducted in the Matlab 2024a environment to examine its positioning performance,
convergence, running time, and capability of processing abnormal data. In the tests, the
network covered an area of 10 km × 10 km × 5 km. The number of nodes was 200. The
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.22]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
22 of 38
velocity was a random value between 0 and 100 m/s. The direction varied randomly within
0–360◦. The largest communication range of nodes was R = 5 km. It was assumed that the
ranging error was subject to the Gaussian distribution, that is, uij ∼N(0, 102). A simple
air motion model of patrol missiles was established, with vmax as the maximum velocity
component of nodes. At time t, the coordinates of the nodes are defined as









x(t)
i
= x(t−1)
i
+ vmax · randx
y(t)
i
= y(t−1)
i
+ vmax · randy
z(t)
i
= z(t−1)
i
+ vmax · randz
(40)
where rand is an evenly distributed random number, and rand ∼U( −1, 1).
All of the numbers were the average from 350 stochastic simulation tests. Meanwhile,
the normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) was adopted as an index to evaluate the
localization results. Its expression is as follows:
NRMSE =
v
u
u
u
u
t
 n
∑
i=1
∥ˆX(t)
i
−X(t)
i
∥
2
F

/n
E
h
∥X(t) ∥
2
F
i
(41)
where ˆX(t)
i
is the estimated position of the ith node. In Appendix B, the Cramer Rao Lower
Bound (CRLB) is also taken as a criterion for assessing the performance of the proposed
algorithm. A total of 15% of nodes were randomly selected as the anchor nodes and tested
in randomly distributed networks, U-shape networks, and O-shape networks, respectively.
5.1. Experimental Setup
All simulations were conducted in MATLAB R2024a on a desktop computer with
an Intel i7-12700K CPU and 32 GB RAM. The swarm operates in a 3D volume of
10 km × 10 km × 5 km. Key parameters are the number of nodes N = 200, maximum
velocity vmax ∈{50, 100} m/s, maximum communication range Rc = 5 km, ranging noise
ϵnoise(t)~N(0, 102), NLOS bias Bmax = 25 m, occurring on 15% of randomly selected links,
and the discrete time step of ∆τ = 1 s. We compare our ST-DCL method against four state-of-
the-art cooperative localization algorithms: classical MDS [8], FC-MDS [11], dwMDS [10],
and vMDS [9]. For a fair comparison, all algorithms were implemented by the authors in
MATLAB based on their original formulations. The normalized root mean square error
(NRMSE, Equation (41)) is used as the primary evaluation metric.
5.2. Performance of the Proposed ST-DCL Method in Different Network Distributions
In order to verify the overall performance of the ST-DCL method in swarm localiza-
tion, ranging errors were evenly distributed in 0.25%R. After statistics, we obtained the
localization results of nodes with the MDS-MAP and the ST-DCL method in randomly
distributed networks, U-shape networks, and O-shape networks, as shown in Figure 4.
Meanwhile, the nodes in randomly distributed networks were taken as an example
to present the thermal map and distribution map of localization errors with the ST-DCL
method and the classical MDS algorithm.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.23]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
23 of 38
 
(a) Randomly distributed networks 
 
(b) U-shape networks 
 
(c) O-shape networks 
Figure 4. Cont.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.24]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
24 of 38
 
(d) Top view of diﬀerent networks 
Figure 4. Distribution of localization results in different networks.
The results from Figure 5 tests reveal that the traditional MDS algorithm has a much
larger localization error than the proposed ST-DCL method in all of these networks, in-
cluding poorly connected, randomly distributed networks; non-convex U-shape networks;
and highly symmetric O-shape networks. It must be attributed to the innate defects of the
traditional MDS algorithm, including static processing, global sensitivity, and the lack of
error resistance mechanism. The proposed ST-DCL method delivers the error suppression
in the temporal and spatial dimensions through its DW-MDS module. Additionally, the
ST-GNN module is added for local nonlinear and dynamic topology compensation so as
to effectively cope with all kinds of complex networks. Therefore, the ST-DCL method is
proven to be highly robust and greatly capable of generalization.
 
(a) MDS localization algorithm 
(b) ST-DCL method 
Figure 5. Thermal maps of localization errors.
5.3. NRMSE Performance
In randomly distributed networks, the percentage of NLOS links was 15%. The
maximum measurement bias was Bmax = 25 m. The ranging error was bij(t) ∼N(0, 102),
with N = 200. The proposed ST-DCL method was compared with classical MDS, FC-MDS,
dwMDS, and vMDS, which are currently popular in terms of performance. The NRMSE
performance of these algorithms varied with time (t ∈[1, 100]), as shown in Figure 6.
In Figure 6a, we have vmax = 100. In Figure 6b, we have vmax = 50. In Figure 6a,b, the
five algorithms show a similar trend. The average NRMSE performance of the ST-DCL
method was 0.0077 and 0.0068, respectively, so that the algorithm always maintained the
optimal performance. The ST-DCL method has the capability of a fast response, and its
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.25]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
25 of 38
topology attention can instantaneously suppress links of poor quality. In this way, it can
prevent the intense diffusion of errors. Moreover, it is capable of closed-loop feedback
and nonlinear correction, lowering the error quickly. As a centralized algorithm, MDS
uses the distance of the shortest path instead of the actual distance to constitute a distance
matrix, which is the main source of errors. The algorithm FC-MDS employs the strategy
of iterative refinement to generate local mapping at each node, which results in excessive
local mapping in networks. The algorithm vMDS mainly focuses on temporal smoothing.
The trajectory smoothing term is adopted to prevent the abrupt change in estimates in
the temporal dimension, but it is difficult to cope with the error caused by multi-hop
propagation in space. The algorithm dwMDS attaches importance to spatial weight but
lacks the explicit temporal handling mechanism.
 
(a) 
max
v
 = 100 
(b) 
max
v
 = 50 
Figure 6. Time variation in NRMSE at two velocities.
5.4. Estimation Tracks of the Mobile Network
In randomly distributed networks, the percentage of NLOS links was 15%. The
maximum measurement bias was Bmax = 25 m. The ranging error was bij(t) ∼N(0, 102),
with r = 5000 m, N = 200, Vmax = 10 m/s, and t ∈[1, 100]. The actual trajectories of nodes
and the estimated trajectories calculated by the ST-DCL method are illustrated in Figure 7.
Four nodes, 21, 22, 23, and 24, were selected. In Figure 7a, the colored solid lines indicate
the estimated trajectories by the ST-DCL method, while the black broken lines represent
the actual trajectories of nodes. The high level of overlapping between such lines implies
that the algorithm FC-MDS can accurately estimate the accurate positions of nodes. In
Figure 7b, the ZX plane is selected, and the trajectories of nodes in the plane can more
vividly demonstrate the estimated performance of the proposed method.
5.5. NRMSE with Different Radii of Communication
In randomly distributed networks, the percentage of NLOS links was 15%. The
maximum measurement bias was Bmax = 25 m. The ranging error was bij(t) ∼N(0, 102),
with Vmax = 10 m/s, N = 200, and t ∈[1, 100]. In Figure 8, the NRMSE performance of the
algorithms is presented with different radii of communication R in randomly distributed
networks. By increasing the radius of communication, the NRMSE of these algorithms
decreases. When R = 3500, the NRMSE performance of the ST-DCL method is close to
CRLB. When the radius of communication R exceeds 2500, the algorithm vMDS needs
to cache two-hop neighbors for nodes so that it gradually degenerates into a centralized
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.26]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
26 of 38
algorithm. Its NRMSE performance is not much different from that of the ST-DCL method.
On the whole, the ST-DCL method delivers the optimal NRMSE performance.
 
 
(a)3D trajectories of tracked nodes 
(b)XZ plane trajectories 
Figure 7. Node trajectory estimation using the proposed ST-DCL method.
Figure 8. NRMSE with different radii of communication.
5.6. Computational Efficiency and Overhead Analysis
In randomly distributed networks, the percentage of NLOS links was 15%. The
maximum measurement bias was Bmax = 25 m. The ranging error was bij(t) ∼N(0, 102),
with R = 5000 m, vmax = 10 m/s, and t ∈[1, 100]. To assess the suitability of ST-DCL for
real-time deployment on resource-constrained platforms, we analyzed the average runtime
per time step relative to the baselines, as shown in Figure 9. (1) Overhead vs. Performance
Trade-off: Compared to the lightweight dwMDS baseline, ST-DCL introduces marginal
computational overhead due to the ST-GNN inference and sliding window maintenance.
Specifically, for the swarm size, the average runtime increases from 28 ms (dwMDS) to
36 ms (ST-DCL), representing an overhead of approximately 28.6%. However, this slight
increase in computational cost yields a significant 66% reduction in localization error
(as detailed in Section 5.3), demonstrating a highly favorable cost-performance trade-off.
(2) Real-time Feasibility: Despite the added overhead, ST-DCL remains significantly more
efficient than global optimization methods like MDS-MAP and SDP-based approaches,
achieving a speedup of roughly 2.6x. Most critically, the absolute runtime of 42.1 ms stays
well below the 100 ms threshold required for typical 10 Hz drone control loops. This confirms
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.27]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
27 of 38
that the proposed framework is computationally efficient enough to run online on onboard
embedded computers (e.g., NVIDIA Jetson series) without inducing control latency.
 
Figure 9. Variation in the number of nodes with running time.
5.7. Robustness and Stress Testing
This section validates the robustness of the ST-DCL framework under two extremely
challenging stress scenarios that go beyond conventional simulation parameters: high-
probability and non-Gaussian NLOS errors and extremely low connectivity with intermit-
tent links. Results are based on over 100 independent Monte Carlo runs.
(1) Limit Test Against Severe NLOS Errors
To emulate harsh, realistic conditions beyond the 15% NLOS probability used
in prior sections, we systematically increase it to 50%; for other parameter settings,
see Section 5.1. Furthermore, the NLOS bias is modeled with a heavy-tailed, two-
component Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). One component represents the nominal
ranging noise (standard deviation of 10 m, consistent with LOS conditions), while the
other simulates severe outliers with a standard deviation of up to 50 m—five times the
nominal value. As shown in Figure 10, when the NLOS probability exceeds 20% or the
error distribution becomes heavy-tailed, the localization error of traditional optimization
methods (e.g., dwMDS) and pure learning methods degrades sharply. In contrast, ST-
DCL demonstrates remarkable stability. Its NRMSE increases gradually, maintaining
usable accuracy (NRMSE < 0.08) even at 50% NLOS probability. This resilience stems
from the synergistic defense of its hybrid architecture: the Huber loss in DW-MDS
provides the first layer of robust estimation, while the dynamic attention mechanism in
the ST-GNN adaptively reduces the aggregation weights for links highly suspected of
NLOS to near-zero levels, achieving effective outlier isolation at the feature level and
curbing spatial error diffusion.
(2) Performance Under Extremely Sparse and Dynamic Connectivity
This test evaluates performance near the network’s connectivity limit, beyond the
communication range analysis in Section 5.4. We construct two severe scenarios: (1) ultra-
low connectivity: A short communication radius reduces the network’s average degree
to 2.5 (near the connectivity threshold). (2) Highly dynamic intermittent links: Simulates
random link outages with a 40% failure probability at each time step.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.28]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
28 of 38
Figure 10. Performance under severe NLOS conditions.
As shown in Figure 11a, in the ultra-low connectivity scenario (with an average node
degree around 2.5 near the critical connectivity threshold), simulation results indicate
that as network connectivity approaches critical levels, the average normalized root mean
square error (NRMSE) of all algorithms generally increases, reflecting a significant decline in
localization performance. Among them, ST-DCL maintains a relatively low error rate even
under extreme sparsity, demonstrating strong robustness, while traditional MDS shows the
most pronounced performance degradation and highest sensitivity to connectivity. Overall,
all algorithms exhibit a performance turning point near the critical connectivity region,
confirming the substantial impact of network connectivity on localization accuracy.
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 11. Performance under extremely sparse and dynamic connectivity conditions. (a) The
relationship between NRMSE and average node connectivity. (b) NRMSE variation with step size.
As shown in Figure 11b, in the highly dynamic intermittent connectivity scenario,
where each link has a 25% probability of failure at each time step, the localization per-
formance of all algorithms exhibits significant fluctuations due to the random link inter-
ruptions. The traditional MDS and FC-MDS methods suffer from severe performance
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.29]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
29 of 38
degradation and high error variance, as they lack the mechanisms to adapt to such dy-
namic link failures. The dwMDS and vMDS methods show moderate improvements by
incorporating spatial weights and temporal smoothing, respectively, but still struggle with
the rapidly changing topology. In contrast, ST-DCL demonstrates superior robustness:
its confidence-based feedback mechanism quickly identifies and down-weights unstable
links, thereby concentrating computational resources on reliable connections. Although
the convergence speed of ST-DCL is slowed by link instability, it eventually achieves a
significantly higher and more stable accuracy than all baseline methods, validating its
effectiveness in highly dynamic and intermittent connectivity environments.
6. Real-World Flight Validation and Benchmarking
To validate the performance and engineering practicality of the ST-DCL framework
in real-world dynamics, such as GPS-denied environments, this chapter conducts field
flight experiments based on ten UAVs. The primary objectives of the experiments include
the following: (1) verifying the real-time capability and stability of the framework on real
hardware platforms; (2) testing the algorithm’s robustness against dynamic topologies
and non-ideal ranging errors in complex scenarios involving building occlusions and
intermittent links; and (3) performing a fair, offline performance comparison among ST-
DCL, traditional optimization methods, and advanced deep learning models using a
unified sensor dataset synchronously recorded during the flights. This chapter sequentially
introduces the experimental system, designed scenarios, and evaluation methodology,
followed by an analysis and discussion of the results.
6.1. Experimental System and Data Acquisition Protocol
6.1.1. Robotic Platform and Sensor Suite
A homogeneous swarm consisting of ten custom-made quadrotor drones serves as the
test platform, as illustrated in Figure 12. Each platform is equipped with an identical set of
sensors and computing hardware:
1. Relative Ranging: A LD150(-1) Ultra-Wideband (UWB, sourced from China Haoru
Technology Company, Beijing, China) module provided peer-to-peer distance measure-
ments. The communication radius was configured to 400 m. We acknowledge and charac-
terize the inherent clock offset and skew between modules, which introduce a systematic
bias into raw range observations.
2. Onboard Computation and Logging: An NVIDIA Jetson Nano (4 GB) served as
the primary computer. Its dual role was to (i) execute the real-time ST-DCL pipeline and
(ii) record all raw sensor data with microsecond-precision timestamps to an onboard SD
card. This device represents the class of resource-constrained embedded processors targeted
by our design.
3. Proprioceptive and Reference Sensors: The stock Pixhawk flight controller provided
inertial measurement unit (IMU) data (accelerometer and gyroscope) and single-point
GPS fixes.
4. A Note on Ground-Truth Fidelity: The single-point GPS positions serve as our
reference trajectory. Under open-sky conditions, their typical horizontal accuracy is
1.5–2.5 m (CEP). In proximity to structures, multipath effects can degrade this further.
While this precludes a centimeter-accurate absolute error assessment, the relative motion
and temporal trends provided by GPS are sufficiently reliable for a comparative analysis
of algorithm behavior, robustness, and consistency. We supplement this with topology-
relative metrics to mitigate absolute drift.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.30]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
30 of 38
(a) 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 12. Physical image of experimental hardware and platform: (a) LD150(-1) UWB ranging
equipment; (b) quadrotor drone; and (c) takeoff scene of ten drones.
6.1.2. Software Stack and Data Pipeline
The software architecture was designed to decouple real-time operation from high-
fidelity data collection for post hoc analysis:
1. Real-Time Onboard Localization: A streamlined C++ implementation of the ST-DCL
algorithm ran at 10 Hz on each Jetson Nano, consuming live UWB and IMU streams to
produce pose estimates.
2. High-Fidelity Sensor Logging: A separate, high-priority process sampled and
packetized all sensor data at their native frequencies (UWB: ~100 Hz, IMU: 200 Hz, and
GPS: 5 Hz) with synchronized hardware timestamps. This resulted in a dense, multimodal
time series dataset for each vehicle.
3. Post-Flight Benchmarking Environment: All logs were synchronized and merged
offline on a high-performance workstation to create a unified “FlightBench” dataset. This
dataset, comprising {time, UWB_range_matrix, IMU_data, GPS_fix}, forms the immutable
basis for all subsequent algorithmic comparisons, guaranteeing identical input conditions.
6.1.3. Deployment Environment
Experiments were conducted in a university campus environment (Figure 13), selected
for its heterogeneous RF propagation characteristics:
1. Zone A (Open Basketball Court): A large, open area primarily exhibiting line-of-
sight (LOS) conditions, serving as a baseline environment.
2. Zone B (Perimeter of a Multi-Story Academic Building): A challenging zone
featuring dense obstacles. Concrete walls induce severe NLOS attenuation and complete
signal occlusion, while also creating strong GPS multipath interference. This zone is
instrumental for stress-testing NLOS resilience.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.31]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
31 of 38
  
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 13.
Open basketball court: (a) open basketball court; (b) perimeter of a multi-story
academic building.
6.2. Designed Flight Scenarios
Three mission-style scenarios were executed to systematically probe different aspects
of performance:
S1: Dynamic Formation in Open Space: The swarm performed coordinated figure-
eight and expanding/contracting circle maneuvers in Zone A. This scenario tests basic
tracking accuracy and smoothness under mild, predictable topology changes.
S2: Controlled NLOS Penetration and Network Partition: A high-stress scenario where
the swarm was split into two sub-teams flying through opposite sides of the building in
Zone B (Figure 13b). This orchestrates a predictable yet severe network partition and NLOS
event, challenging the algorithm’s error suppression and recovery convergence.
S3: Prolonged Mixed-Environment Surveillance: A 15 min free-flight mission where
UAVs patrolled pseudo-randomly between Zones A and B. This tests long-term stability,
adaptability to intermittent challenges, and overall system endurance.
6.3. Experimental Methodology
To ensure fairness and consistency in evaluation, this experiment adopts a strategy of
“Online Verification, Offline Uniform Processing”:
1. Online Operation: All UAVs run the ST-DCL algorithm in real time, verifying its
stability and feasibility on the embedded platforms (Jetson Nano).
2. Offline Uniform Processing: After the flights, the sensor data (UWB ranging, IMU,
and GPS) recorded by all UAVs are time-synchronized and aligned on a unified high-
performance computer, forming a standard dataset. All compared algorithms—including
the baseline methods MDS [8], dwMDS [10], vMDS [9], our proposed ST-DCL, and a
representative deep learning baseline, the Spatio-Temporal Graph Attention Network (ST-
GAT) [30]—are executed on this identical dataset. This method completely eliminates
interference from hardware differences and real-time system scheduling.
The evaluation metrics primarily consist of the following two, balancing absolute
accuracy and internal consistency: (i) Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE): The root mean
square error between the estimated position and the GPS’s reference position; (ii) Formation
Geometry Error (FGE): For each timestamp, calculate the relative distances between all
UAV pairs, then compute the RMSE of the differences between the distances derived from
the estimated positions and those from the GPS references. This metric effectively mitigates
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.32]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
32 of 38
the common error caused by GPS absolute drift, more reliably reflecting the algorithm’s
ability to maintain the internal geometry of the swarm.
6.4. Results and Analysis
6.4.1. System Feasibility: Computational Load and Real-Time Performance
To validate the deployment feasibility of ST-DCL on resource-constrained platforms,
we measured the average processing time per frame of each algorithm on the Jetson
Nano. The results are summarized in Table 1. ST-DCL achieves an average runtime
of approximately 45 ms, meeting the 10 Hz real-time requirement. In comparison, the
traditional MDS is unsuitable for real-time operation due to its O(N3) complexity. While
vMDS and dwMDS are operable, their execution times are significantly longer than that
of ST-DCL. Although the deep learning model ST-GAT has a short inference time, it
requires extensive offline training on simulated data and struggles to generalize unseen real-
world impairments, highlighting a key limitation of purely data-driven approaches. These
results confirm the efficiency and practical balance achieved by ST-DCL for lightweight
embedded systems.
Table 1. Computational performance comparison of different algorithms on the Jetson Nano platform.
Algorithm
Avg. Run Time (ms)
Real-Time Feasibility (10 Hz)
Note
MDS
>1000
No
O(N3) complexity
dwMDS
120
Marginal
Iterative optimization
vMDS
95
Yes (but slow)
With temporal smoothing
ST-DCL (Ours)
45
Yes
Efficient optimization +
lightweight GNN
ST-GAT (DL Baseline)
15
Yes
Requires extensive training;
generalization-challenged
6.4.2. Comprehensive Localization Performance Comparison
The unified flight dataset for offline benchmarking comprises the time-synchronized
UWB ranging matrices, IMU measurements, and GPS references from all ten UAVs across
the three designed scenarios (S1, S2, and S3). The localization accuracy of all algorithms on
the unified flight dataset, with the Formation Geometry Error (FGE) as the primary metric,
is presented in Table 2. The key findings are as follows:
1. Consistent Superiority: ST-DCL achieves the best accuracy across all three scenarios.
2. Robustness Verification: In the most challenging scenario, Scenario 2, featuring
structured NLOS, the ST-DCL’s error (1.52 m) is significantly lower than that of traditional
optimization methods (dwMDS: 3.01 m; vMDS: 2.45 m), demonstrating the effectiveness of
its closed-loop error suppression mechanism.
3. Comparison with Deep Learning: The deep learning baseline ST-GAT performs
reasonably within its training distribution (Scenario 3), but its performance severely
degrades in the out-of-distribution (OOD) scenario, Scenario 2, even underperforming
vMDS. This clearly reveals the generalization bottleneck of purely data-driven methods
when confronting real, unseen physical-layer impairments. In contrast, ST-DCL, which
integrates theory-guided optimization with data-driven compensation, exhibits stronger
environmental adaptability.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.33]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
33 of 38
Table 2. Localization accuracy comparison of different algorithms.
Algorithm
FGE (Scenario 1)
FGE (Scenario 2)
FGE (Scenario 3)
MDS
1.60 m
Fail
Fail
dwMDS
1.05 m
3.01 m
2.28 m
vMDS
0.92 m
2.45 m
1.97 m
ST-GAT (DL)
0.81 m
2.87 m
1.85 m
ST-DCL (Ours)
0.75 m
1.52 m
1.23 m
6.4.3. Visualization of the Key Mechanism
To intuitively demonstrate the core adaptive confidence weight mechanism of ST-DCL,
we performed an in-depth analysis using the temporal data of a representative link from
the ten-UAV swarm that underwent a complete NLOS event cycle. The results are shown
in Figure 14. Although the experiment involved 45 potential links, the temporal data from
this single link clearly reveals the general operating principle of the algorithm. Figure 14a
illustrates three key variables: the GPS-RTK reference distance reflecting true relative
motion (black line), the raw UWB ranging measurements containing significant NLOS bias
(red line), and the dynamically calculated confidence weight cij(t) by the algorithm (blue
line). It can be observed that during the NLOS period at t ≈8–10 s, the ranging values
exhibit a sudden jump, while the confidence weight plummets from ~1.0 to below 0.2 within
approximately 150 milliseconds, achieving an active “soft cut-off” of the unreliable link.
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 14. Performance under extremely sparse and dynamic connectivity conditions. (a) Temporal
Evolution of Reference Distance, NLOS-Affected UWB Ranging, and Dynamic Confidence Weight.
(b) Positioning Error Comparison: ST-DCL Suppression vs. No Suppression During NLOS Event.
Figure 14b further demonstrates the effect of this mechanism: the positioning error of
the node associated with this link (green line), although increased during the NLOS period,
shows that its peak value is significantly suppressed, and its convergence speed is much
faster than the reference case without suppression (red line). This visualization of a single
link directly correlates the dynamic weight adjustment with the error suppression effect.
In practice, this mechanism operates independently and in parallel on all links within the
swarm, collectively forming the foundation of the ST-DCL framework for resisting dynamic
topology and NLOS interference, thereby enhancing global positioning consistency.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.34]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
34 of 38
7. Conclusions and Future Work
This paper has confronted the fundamental challenge of spatio-temporal error cou-
pling in cooperative localization for dynamic drone swarms. The core outcome is the devel-
opment of ST-DCL, a unified framework that mathematically formalizes, algorithmically
decouples, and systematically suppresses the intertwined error propagation mechanisms
under dynamic topology. The principal contributions are fourfold:
1. Theoretical Foundation: We established a novel differential equation model for error
propagation under dynamic topology, which, for the first time, rigorously quantifies the
joint impact of abrupt kinematic changes and network algebraic connectivity on localization
error, providing a predictive upper bound.
2. Algorithmic Innovation: We introduced a spatio-temporal decoupling architecture
via the synergistic cooperation of the DW-MDS optimizer and the ST-GNN corrector.
This design cleanly separates the task of global coarse localization with inherent error
suppression (via DW-MDS) from that of local, nonlinear error compensation (via ST-GNN).
3. Provable Convergence Guarantees: The framework is underpinned by rigorous
theoretical analysis, proving the global linear convergence of the DW-MDS optimizer
and the bounded convergence of the ST-GNN’s residual correction, thereby delivering a
provably stable localization system.
4. The framework’s performance is rigorously validated through both extensive
simulations and real-world flight tests. Under stringent simulated conditions (200 nodes,
50 m/s, and 15% NLOS), ST-DCL achieves an NRMSE of 0.0068, representing a 21%
enhancement over state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, field experiments with a 10-UAV
swarm in GPS-denied, NLOS-prone environments confirm its practical robustness, real-
time capability, and consistent accuracy, thereby substantiating its deployment readiness
for autonomous missions.
Despite its strengths, there are still some limitations in this research. The computation
of the proposed algorithm is highly complex because of the DW-MDS sliding window opti-
mization and the ST-GNN dynamic attention mechanism. Hence, it faces some real-time
challenges in very large swarms. The future research will focus on innovative clustered
architecture and algebraic connectivity-guided layered topology segmentation so as to
distribute the loads of computation to local optimizations of subset swarms. Moreover,
lightweight ST-GNN reasoning engines are utilized to quantitatively compress the com-
plexity from O
 N2
to O

N
√
N

.
In addition, while the chosen hyperparameters (e.g., dilation factor, feedback gain)
demonstrate robust performance in our validation scenarios, systematic sensitivity analysis
and adaptive tuning strategies for varying deployment conditions remain valuable future
work to further enhance practical applicability.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.W.; methodology, H.W. and Z.T.; validation, Z.T. and
Z.S.; formal analysis, H.W. and Z.W.; investigation, H.W. and H.X.; resources, H.X. and Z.T.; data
curation, H.W. and Z.W.; writing—original draft preparation, H.W. and Z.S.; writing—review and
editing, H.W. and Z.S.; visualization, Z.T.; supervision, Z.S.; project administration, H.W.; funding
acquisition, H.W. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No.
GZC20252838) and the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (Grant No. 2025AFB390).
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in this study are included in the
article. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: The author extends their sincere gratitude to the laboratory team members for
their technical support.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.35]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
35 of 38
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Appendix A. Proof of Theorem 1 (Upper Bound of Error Accumulation)
Proof . Step 1: Expand the recursive equation of error. Based on the spatio-temporal error
coupling model (Equation (7)), we can
Let t = 0, so that there is
δ(t)
= α(t) · δ(t −1) + ϵ(t)
= α(t) · [α(t −1) · δ(t −2) + ϵ(t −1)] + ϵ(t)
= δ(0) ·
t
∏
k=1
α(k) +
t
∑
k=1
ϵ(k) ·
t
∏
m=k+1
α(m)
(A1)
where ϵ(k) = β · Bmax ·
p
pNLOS(k) + γ · n(k).
Step 2: Process the upper bound of the noise term. Applying the Hölder inequality to
separate the product of terms, we bound the individual noise term as follows:
γ · n(k) ≤γ · E
h
n2(k)
i1/2
= γ
(A2)
So, the accumulation noise term satisfies
t
∑
k=1
ϵ(k) ·
t
∏
m=k+1
α(m) ≤
t
∑
k=1

β · Bmax ·
q
pNLOS(k) + γ

·
t
∏
m=k+1
α(m)
(A3)
Step 3: Verification by the mathematical induction method
When t = 1, there is
δ(1) ≤α(1) · δ(0) + β · Bmax ·
q
pNLOS (1) + γ
(A4)
It is obviously established.
When t = k, there is
δ(k) ≤δ(0) ·
k
∏
m=1
α(m) +
k
∑
m=1

β · Bmax ·
q
pNLOS(m) + γ

·
k
∏
n=m+1
α(n)
(A5)
When recursion reaches t = k + 1, we can obtain
δ(k + 1) ≤α(k + 1) · δ(k) + β · Bmax ·
q
pNLOS (k + 1) + γ
(A6)
The induction assumption is substituted to obtain the formula of the upper bound. □
Appendix B. CRLB Deduction Process
(1) Problem modeling and key assumptions
The cooperative localization of drone swarms under dynamic topology in this paper
can be modeled into a problem of parameter estimation. The parameter to be estimated is
the trajectory of all nodes in the time window [t −T, t]:
θ = [X(t −T)T, X(t −T + 1)T, . . . , X(t)T]
T
(A7)
where X(τ) = [x1(τ)T, . . . , xN(τ)T]
T represents the position vector of all nodes at the time τ.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.36]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
36 of 38
The observation model is based on the ranging equation in Equation (4):
edij(τ) =


xi(τ) −xj(τ)


 + bij(τ) + nij(τ)
(A8)
where bij(τ) is the NLOS bias, and nij(τ) is the measurement noise.
(2) Establishment of likelihood function
The conditional probability density function (PDF) of the observation is
p

edij(τ) | θ

=
1
q
2πσ2
ij(τ)
exp


−

edij(τ) −


xi(τ) −xj(τ)



2
2σ2
ij(τ)



(A9)
where σ2
ij(τ) = σ2
n,ij(τ) + σ2
b,ij(τ) is the total noise variance.
The joint likelihood function is the product of all effective observations:
p(eD | θ) =
t
∏
τ=t−T
∏
(i,j)∈E(τ)
p

f
dij(τ) | θ

(A10)
where E(τ) is the set of communication links available at time τ.
(3) Deduction of Fisher information matrix (FIM)
Every element of FIM is given by observing the negative expectation for the second-
order derivative of the parameter:
I(θ)kl = −E
∂2 ln p
∂θk∂θl

(A11)
In the ranging model, FIM can be expressed as
I(θ) = ∑
τ
∑
(i,j)∈E(τ)
1
σ2 Gij(τ)GT
ij(τ)
(A12)
where Gij(τ) = ∂


xi(τ) −xj(τ)



∂θ
is the directional gradient vector.
(4) CRLB closed-form expression
The lower bound of localization error of the node i at time τ is
E
h
∥ˆxi(τ) −xi(τ)∥2i
≥tr
h
I−1(θ)
i
xi(τ)

(A13)
where [·]xi(τ) stands for the 3 × 3 covariance sub-matrix corresponding to the subspace of
the parameter.
The normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) for the lower bound and in
Equation (41) is defined by
NRMSE ≥
v
u
u
u
t 1
N
N
∑
i=1
tr

I−1(θ)

xi(t)

E
h
∥X(t)∥2
F
i
(A14)
References
1.
Ruan, L.; Li, G.; Dai, W.; Tian, S.; Fan, G.; Wang, J.; Dai, X. Cooperative Relative Localization for UAV Swarm in GNSS-Denied
Environment: A Coalition Formation Game Approach. IEEE Internet Things J. 2022, 9, 11560–11577. [CrossRef]
2.
Gao, H.; Zhang, A.; Li, W.; Cai, H. Drone Swarm Robust Cooperative Formation Pursuit through Relative Positioning in a
Location Denial Environment. Drones 2024, 8, 455. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.37]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
37 of 38
3.
Chen, W.; Zhu, J.; Liu, J.; Guo, H. A fast coordination approach for large-scale drone swarm. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2023, 221,
1420–1433. [CrossRef]
4.
Fan, Y.; Qi, X.; Liu, L. Fault-Tolerant Cooperative Localization of 3D Mobile Networks via Two-Layer Filter Multidimensional
Scaling. IEEE Sens. J. 2021, 21, 8354–8366. [CrossRef]
5.
Ullah, I.; Qian, S.; Deng, Z.; Lee, J.-H. Extended Kalman Filter-based localization algorithm by edge computing in Wireless Sensor
Networks. Digit. Commun. Netw. 2021, 7, 187–195. [CrossRef]
6.
Bai, X.; Wang, Y.; Ping, H.; Xu, X.; Li, D.; Wang, S. InferLoc: Hypothesis-Based Joint Edge Inference and Localization in Sparse
Sensor Networks. ACM Trans. Sens. Netw. 2024, 20, 8. [CrossRef]
7.
Zhang, Y.; Wang, S.; Liang, H.; Li, X.; Wang, Z.; Lu, H. Dual hybrid frameworks combining graph convolutional network with
decoding for covering location problem. iScience 2024, 27, 109803. [CrossRef]
8.
Xiong, W.; He, J.; Hu, K.; So, H.C.; Leung, C.-S. Robust Multidimensional Similarity Analysis for IoT Localization with SS
Distributed Errors. IEEE Internet Things J. 2024, 11, 35492–35504. [CrossRef]
9.
Zhao, Y.; Wong, W.-C.; Feng, T.; Garg, H.K. Calibration-Free Indoor Positioning Using Crowdsourced Data and Multidimensional
Scaling. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 2020, 19, 1770–1785. [CrossRef]
10.
Zhang, Z.; Wang, D.; Yang, B.; Yin, J. Weighted Multidimensional Scaling Localization Method with Bias Reduction Based on
TOA. IEEE Sens. J. 2023, 23, 19803–19814. [CrossRef]
11.
AlJabri, Z.; Abawajy, J.H.; Huda, S. MDS-Based Cloned Device Detection in IoT-Fog Network. IEEE Internet Things J. 2024, 11,
22128–22139. [CrossRef]
12.
Wang, R.; Xu, C.; Li, R.; Duan, S.; Zhang, X. Cooperative Localization and Mapping Based on UWB/IMU Fusion Using Factor
Graphs. IEEE Sens. J. 2024, 24, 21931–21940. [CrossRef]
13.
Liu, Y.; Wu, C.; Kong, X.; Du, X.; You, Y. A Tightly Coupled Method for Indoor Vehicle Navigation Based on Smartphone IMU
and BLE. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2024, 73, 13895–13906. [CrossRef]
14.
Han, J.; Xue, K.; Li, J.; Xing, Y.; Yu, R.; Wei, D.S.L.; Xue, G. FMPTCP: Achieving High Bandwidth Utilization and Low Latency in
Data Center Networks. IEEE Trans. Commun. 2024, 72, 317–333. [CrossRef]
15.
Hu, C.; Qu, G.; Zhang, Y. Pigeon-inspired fuzzy multi-objective task allocation of unmanned aerial vehicles for multi-target
tracking. Appl. Soft Comput. 2022, 126, 1455–1462. [CrossRef]
16.
Wu, H.; Wu, P.-F.; Shi, Z.-S.; Sun, S.-Y.; Wu, Z.-H. An aerial ammunition ad hoc network collaborative localization algorithm
based on relative ranging and velocity measurement in a highly-dynamic topographic structure. Def. Technol. 2023, 25, 231–248.
[CrossRef]
17.
Liu, Z.; Li, Z.; Liu, A.; Sun, Y.; Jing, S. Fusion of binocular vision, 2D lidar and IMU for outdoor localization and indoor planar
mapping. Meas. Sci. Technol. 2023, 34, 025203. [CrossRef]
18.
An, S.; Lian, J.; Wang, D. Distributed Tracking Control of Multi-Agent Systems with Transfer Restricted Switching Topologies: A
Cycle Stabilization Approach. IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng. 2023, 25, 1964–1974. [CrossRef]
19.
Farhat, M.; Kali, Y.; Saad, M.; Rahman, M.H.; Lopez-Herrejon, R.E. Walking position commanded NAO robot using nonlinear
disturbance observer-based fixed-time terminal sliding mode. ISA Trans. 2024, 146, 592–602. [CrossRef]
20.
Li, H.; Fan, X.; Shi, M. Research on the Cooperative Passive Location of Moving Targets Based on Improved Particle Swarm
Optimization. Drones 2023, 7, 264. [CrossRef]
21.
Pan, X.; Huang, G.; Zhang, Z.; Li, J.; Bao, H.; Zhang, G. Robust Collaborative Visual-Inertial SLAM for Mobile Augmented Reality.
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 2024, 30, 7354–7363. [CrossRef]
22.
Chen, Z.; Lu, Z.; Chen, Q.; Zhong, H.; Zhang, Y.; Xue, J.; Wu, C. Spatial-temporal short-term traffic flow prediction model based
on dynamical-learning graph convolution mechanism. Inf. Sci. 2022, 611, 522–539. [CrossRef]
23.
Ramezani, M.; Wang, L.; Knights, J.; Li, Z.; Pounds, P.; Moghadam, P. Pose-Graph Attentional Graph Neural Network for Lidar
Place Recognition. IEEE Robot. Autom. Let. 2024, 9, 1182–1189. [CrossRef]
24.
Dai, M.; Zheng, E.; Feng, Z.; Qi, L.; Zhuang, J.; Yang, W. Vision-Based UAV Self-Positioning in Low-Altitude Urban Environments.
IEEE Trans. Image Process. 2024, 33, 493–508. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Zhu, X.; Lai, J.; Zhou, B.; Lv, P.; Chen, S. Weight Factor Graph Co-Location Method for UAV Formation Based on Navigation
Performance Evaluation. IEEE Sens. J. 2024, 23, 13037–13051. [CrossRef]
26.
Li, B.; Gan, Z.; Chen, D.; Sergey Aleksandrovich, D. UAV Maneuvering Target Tracking in Uncertain Environments Based on
Deep Reinforcement Learning and Meta-Learning. Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 3789. [CrossRef]
27.
Gao, Z.; Yang, L.; Dai, Y. MO-AVC: Deep-Reinforcement-Learning-Based Trajectory Control and Task Offloading in Multi-UAV-
Enabled MEC Systems. IEEE Internet Things J. 2024, 11, 11395–11414. [CrossRef]
28.
Zhu, C.; Rui, Y.; Chen, J.; Pu, Y.; Pan, X.; Gao, F.; Ma, X. A Robust Hyperboloid Method for Velocity-Free MS/AE Source
Localization with Heavy-Tailed Proximity Metric. Rock Mech. Rock Eng. 2025, 58, 2419–2433. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
[p.38]
Drones 2026, 10, 69
38 of 38
29.
Jiang, R.; Tang, L.; Wang, X.; Zhang, L.; Xu, Y.; Li, D. An Adaptive Kalman Filter Combination Positioning Method Integrating
UWB and GPS. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2024, 12, 18222–18236. [CrossRef]
30.
Song, J.; Son, J.; Seo, D.; Han, K.; Kim, N.; Kim, S.-W. ST-GAT: A Spatio-Temporal Graph Attention Network for Accurate Traffic
Speed Prediction. In CIKM ’22: The 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management; ACM: New York,
NY, USA, 2022; pp. 4500–4504. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10010069
=== END ===
