warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1370.pdf
sha256: 853AADE62DE3677E8E7B7CB77C3A200EFED848E1DC3C28083049C8DC7B2131F4
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 10
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Measurement 192 (2022) 110797
Available online 12 February 2022
0263-2241/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Measurement
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/measurement
Cooperative navigation for UAVs in GNSS-denied area based on optimized
belief propagation
Jian Li a, Gongliu Yang a, Qingzhong Cai a,∗, Haofei Niu a, Jing Li b
a School of Instrumentation and Optoelectronic Engineering, Beihang University, 37 Xueyuan Road, Beijing, 100191, PR China
b Beijing Institute of Petrochemical Technology, 19 Qingyuan North Road, Beijing, 100191, PR China
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Keywords:
Cooperative navigation
Belief propagation
Position uncertainty
UAV swarm
GNSS-denied area
A B S T R A C T
A multitude of individual unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) cooperatively self-organized as a swarm attracts
increasing attention for exploration and parallel tasks. Accurate position is essential for UAVs to avoid collision
and implement control. Although the Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) has been integrated in UAV,
it is susceptible to disruption. In this paper, we propose a novel cooperative navigation framework based on
optimized belief propagation (BP) in the GNSS-denied area. Specifically, we derive a directional uncertainty
model to characterize the position information of UAVs with different dynamic motions. With this model, we
improve the navigation performance by designing a weighted uncertainty belief propagation (WUBP) based
on information evaluation. Simulation and experimental results validate that in the dynamic scenarios, the
proposed WUBP can make the swarm reap the benefits of more accurate positional estimate from UAVs with
less maneuvers, higher-grade of INS or shorter time interval of GNSS signal lost.
1. Introduction
UAV swarms, inspired by swarms of animals in nature, are com-
pletely distributed and self-organized multiagent system [1]. These
UAVs are ideal for completing tasks that can be broken into many par-
allel operations including disaster recovery, environment monitoring
and military operations. Compared with the application of single UAV,
a swarm system can offer multiple operation advantages in terms of
cooperative effects, load capacity and cost effectiveness. Nevertheless,
the swarm requires more emphasis on the accuracy of navigation
information, which allows it to follow precise control commands and
avoid collision while performing formation. In open airspace, stringent
navigation capability is conventionally achieved with the aid of GNSS
and inertial navigation system (INS). However, UAVs may lose GNSS
signals while passing through the denied areas, which widely exist
in operating environments such as urban canyons or in buildings.
Fig. 1 shows a typical scenario of the GNSS-denied environments, in
which the main problem is that the position error of INS tends to drift
unbounded owing to the inertial sensor errors [2].
Alternatively, cooperation navigation is an emerging paradigm, in
which UAVs help each other to improve navigation performance via
fully exploit the relative relationship among all UAVs and the nav-
igation information in a cooperative network. The main idea of co-
operation navigation is illustrated in Fig. 1. When a team of UAVs
(labeled 1 to 5) enter GNSS denied zone, although none of them can
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail address: qingzhong_cai@buaa.edu.cn (Q. Cai).
independently maintain high-accuracy navigation, together they can
cooperatively alleviate the growth of INS position error over time by
fusing estimated signal metrics (such as Time of Arrival) and position
information of neighboring UAVs. In addition, with the development
of the Ultra-Wideband (UWB) in the field of wireless communication
[3], high-precision relative measurements can be acquired at low cost.
Thus, in this paper, we investigate the cooperation navigation method
without external infrastructure to improve the navigation performance
of UAV swarm.
In previous works, considerable efforts have been made to design
appropriate algorithms for cooperative navigation. Classical algorithms
such as extended Kalman filter (EKF) [4], particle filters (PF) [5],
and optimization-based technique [6] are widely employed to solve
the cooperative navigation problem. However, these algorithms are
not amenable for a distributed implementation because they require
a central processor to compute the agents’ position, which makes it
susceptible to single-node failure. Moreover, the communication bottle-
neck at the central processor and the curse of dimensionality problem
become prohibitive to large team of UAVs. To address these weak-
nesses, recent literature [7–15] has focused increasingly on distributed
solutions, which only require local information exchange to improve
the location estimates. In [9], the proposed method utilizes simulated
annealing to minimize the sum of square errors. The works in [10] and
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2022.110797
Received 8 November 2021; Received in revised form 5 January 2022; Accepted 24 January 2022
[p.2]
Measurement 192 (2022) 110797
2
J. Li et al.
Fig. 1. Diagram of cooperation navigation for UAVs (the localization error is represented by an ellipse with the axis corresponding to the direction of localization error).
[11] are proposed to solve cooperative navigation problem by multi-
dimensional scaling and map stitching. However, these methods only
compute a deterministic estimate for agent. The absence of addition
information about the reliability of estimates making these methods
inappropriate for UAV swarm cooperative navigation, especially in the
presence of INS errors.
To deal with above problem an algorithm known as belief propaga-
tion was introduced in [15], which is a popular member of Bayesian ap-
proach that runs across factor graphs. The effectiveness of BP-based al-
gorithm is evidenced by its successful application in various fields [12–
15] and will serve as the basic algorithm in this paper. However, most
previous works involve surrounding anchors (such as well-equipped
leader and fixed beacons) to provide precise knowledge about posi-
tions. In anchor-free environments, the accumulated error in positional
estimate that caused by inertial measurement unit (IMU) severely
hinders the development of Bayesian distributed algorithms in practi-
cal implementation. Solutions for cooperative localization in wireless
sensor networks have been presented in [15] and [16], however, the
system dynamic model is considered to be a displacement with additive
Gaussian noise, which fails to hold in practice due to the neglection of
accumulated errors caused by INS. The theoretical limit of localization
accuracy was quantitatively analyzed in [1] and [16] by employing
Cramer–Rao Bound, yet it mainly focuses on the positioning uncertainty
induced by ranging link inaccuracy and is normally limited to off-
line system analysis. Multiple-AUV cooperative localization without
infrastructure was investigated in [13] and [14], with an understanding
about the effects of inertial measurements, Yichen Li et al. designed
an improved BP-based algorithm by considering a gradually increas-
ing variance to approximate the accumulation of the position error.
However, only limited improvement of performance is gained from
this algorithm due to the neglection of dynamic factor. Besides, pre-
cise position information has a pivotal role in real-time flight control
of UAVs for path tracking, whose uncertainty is often overlooked.
Some effective control methods do include this information but in a
disturbance tolerance way [17–19].
In spite of above research progress, a study particularly emphasizing
on cooperative navigation based on dynamic uncertainty evaluation
is still missing. In this paper, we exploit position uncertainty model
by taking INS error statistics into account to improve the localization
performance of UAV under dynamic scenarios. Specifically, the main
contribution of this paper can be summarized as follows:
(1) We take real INS features into consideration and derive a
position uncertainty model in terms of directions to characterize the
position estimation, which shows relationship between the position
uncertainty and the effective factors (e.g. quality of INS, dynamic
maneuver, time interval of GNSS signal lost).
(2) A position information intensity is derived from inertial mea-
surements statistics to reflect the quality of the estimate and adaptively
tune the weights of navigation information based on the UAV position
uncertainty model.
(3) A novel distributed cooperative navigation algorithm named
WUBP based on Bayesian framework is proposed, in which the pro-
posed directional position uncertainty model is employed to further
reduce the impact of accumulated INS errors.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describe the
formulation of the problem to be solved and system framework. The
expression for the directional position uncertainty model is derived in
Section 3. Section 4 presents the proposed algorithm. Sections 5 and 6
validate the proposed method through numerical simulation and real
world experiment. Finally, a conclusion is drawn in Section 7.
2. Problem formulation and system framework
2.1. Problem formulation
Consider a team of 𝑁𝑎(labeled 1 to 𝑁𝑎) UAVs navigating in GNSS-
denied areas without infrastructure, each UAV is equipped with on-
board IMU sensor and UWB radio devices for intra- and inter-nodes
measurements, A typical scenario is shown in Fig. 1, in which the
members of UAV team exchange navigation information with neighbors
so as to improve their individual position estimates. Both the measure-
ment and calculation processes are made in discrete time instants 𝑡𝑛
(𝑛= (1, 2, … , 𝑁)). The position of UAV 𝑖at time 𝑡𝑛is described by
𝑥(𝑡𝑛)
𝑖
. Within the team, the neighbor set of UAVs from which UAV 𝑖can
receive and decode transmission at time 𝑡𝑛is denoted by 𝛤(𝑡𝑛)
𝑖
. Using
packets from 𝑗∈𝛤𝑖, UAV 𝑖is able to make measurements of signal
metrics (denoted by 𝑧𝑗→𝑖), which contain information about relative
distance and bearing between UAVs. We denote the set of relative
measurements by 𝑧(1∶𝑡𝑁)
𝑟𝑒𝑙
= {{𝑧(1∶𝑡𝑁)
𝑗→𝑖
}∀𝑗∈𝛤𝑖}𝑖=1,…,𝑁𝑎. Additionally, UAVs
utilize local inertial measurements (denoted by 𝑧𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓) to estimate its
own position between different timesteps. The full set of measurements
is denoted by 𝑧(1∶𝑡𝑁) = {𝑧(1∶𝑡𝑁)
𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓
𝑧(1∶𝑡𝑁)
𝑟𝑒𝑙
}.
The objective of cooperative navigation in GNSS-denied areas is
to determine UAV positions from prior knowledge as well as mea-
surements with errors, and further alleviate the impact of accumu-
lated errors induced by IMU. From a Bayesian perspective, this task
means to determine joint posteriori probability distribution function
(PDF)𝑝(𝑥(0∶𝑡𝑁)
1∶𝑁𝑎|𝑧(1∶𝑡𝑁)), given measurements up to time 𝑡𝑁. Note that
only horizontal position of UAV is considered due to the barometer can
be used to measure altitude.
[p.3]
Measurement 192 (2022) 110797
3
J. Li et al.
Fig. 2. Cooperative network factor graph of the proposed cooperative navigation
framework. We omit the superscript of time slot for simplicity and the clouds
represent the remainder of the network factor graph. 𝑝(𝑧𝑗→𝑖|𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗) and 𝑝(𝑥𝑖|𝑥𝑖, 𝑧𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓)
are abbreviated by 𝜙𝑗𝑖and ℎ𝑖, the proposed weighting function is denoted by 𝑊𝑖.
2.2. System framework
In this paper, we develop a Bayesian framework for UAV swarm
cooperative navigation while considering the position estimation un-
certainty and information reliability, which incorporates a factor graph
with the proposed weighting function and particle-based BP algorithm.
Cooperative navigation problem can be mathematically formulated
as an inference problem. According to Bayes’ Rule and conditional inde-
pendence, the joint posteriori PDF 𝑝(𝑥(0∶𝑡𝑁)
1∶𝑁𝑎|𝑧(1∶𝑡𝑁)) can be decomposed
into:
𝑝(𝑥(0∶𝑡𝑁)
1∶𝑁𝑎|𝑧(1∶𝑡𝑁))
∝𝑝(𝑥(0)
1∶𝑁𝑎) ×
𝑡𝑁
∏
𝑡=1
{𝑝(𝑥(t)
1∶𝑁𝑎|𝑥(t−1)
1∶𝑁𝑎, 𝑧𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓) × 𝑝(𝑧(𝑡)
𝑟𝑒𝑙|𝑥(t)
1∶𝑁𝑎)}
∝
𝑁𝑎
∏
𝑖=1
𝑝(𝑥(0)
𝑖) ×
𝑡𝑁
∏
𝑡=1
𝑁𝑎
∏
𝑖=1
{𝑝(𝑥(t)
𝑖|𝑥(t−1)
𝑖
, 𝑧𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓) ×
∏
𝑗∈𝛤(𝑢)
𝑖
𝑝(𝑧(𝑡)
𝑗→𝑖|𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖, 𝑥(𝑡)
𝑗)}
(1)
where 𝑝(𝑥(0)
𝑖) is the a prior on the UAV’s initial position, and
𝑝(𝑥(t)
𝑖|𝑥(t−1)
𝑖
, 𝑧𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓) is the mobility model, 𝑝(𝑧(𝑡)
𝑗→𝑖|𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖, 𝑥(𝑡)
𝑗) denote the
model of UWB relative measurement.
However, to obtain the minimum mean-square-error (MMSE) esti-
mate of 𝑥𝑡𝑁
𝑖, direct marginalization of the posterior PDF 𝑝(𝑥(0∶𝑡𝑁)
1∶𝑁𝑎|𝑧(1∶𝑡𝑁))
is unfeasible due to the total computational amount grows with the
dimension of state space, which known as the curse of dimensional-
ity problem [20]. BP is an iterative message-passing algorithm based
on the theory of factor graphs [21] whose calculation complexity
scales only linearly with the time steps. Therefore, it is attractive for
cooperative navigation problem.
We map the factor graph onto the physical network topology,
resulting in a cooperative network factor graph as shown in Fig. 2. The
main modification in the proposed framework is shown in the dotted
box. The circle node 𝑥and 𝑥𝑤denote variable with respect to position
estimate and estimate with uncertainty. The square node indicates a
function of the variables connected to it. In cooperative network factor
graph, we refer to the marginal posterior distribution of UAV position
and the information transmitted from one UAV to another as belief
and message respectively. The arrows above the edges indicate the
information passing directions. The basic operations performed on the
factor graph can be found in [15].
3. Derivation of directional position uncertainty model
During UAV navigate in GNSS-denied areas, the position estimates
associated with predicted belief tends to diverge with time due to
unhindered drift in inertial sensor measurements. Having more than
160 m position error after 60 s can be typical (with tactical grade
sensor). Thus, using the beliefs produced by prediction step directly
often causes BP algorithms to behave unpredictably in terms of accu-
racy and even lead it to fail. In this section, we address these concerns
by analyzing the statistic properties of INS accumulated position errors,
leading to the closed-form expressions of the position estimation uncer-
tainty model, which can characterize the predicted belief and act as a
navigation performance indicator.
3.1. Error model of inertial system
UAV onboard INS is a nonlinear and time-varying system, whose
error is unbounded and closely related to the specific navigation tra-
jectory of the carrier. Thus, it is hard to obtain an accurate analytical
solution of the INS dynamic error model. To characterize the position
errors induced by INS and mitigate the defect of BP-based algorithm
failure, we simplify the complete INS error model out of consideration
for UAV carrier maneuvers, leading to the time-domain solution of sim-
plified system position error differential equation. Details of solution
procedure are provided in Appendix.
𝛿𝒑(𝑡) = 𝝓(𝑡)𝑿(0) + ∫
𝑡
0
𝝓(𝑡−𝜏)𝑩𝑑𝜏
(2)
where 𝛿𝒑is the error vector of position, 𝑿(0) is the initial error state,
𝑩denotes the sensor error, 𝝓(𝑡) is the state transition matrix.
It is evident that the position errors drift with time due to the errors
of accelerometers and gyroscopes integrated in the INS. In addition,
since the initial error state can be accurately estimated when UAV aided
by GNSS, its influence can be safely neglected. Hence, it is necessary
to link the statistical characteristic of sensor error model to that of
position estimation uncertainty.
The inertial sensor errors are mainly gyroscope drifts and ac-
celerometer
biases
that
incorporate
deterministic
as
well
as
non-deterministic components. The deterministic components include
residual scale factor errors, which characterize non-random effects and
introduce errors proportional to the sensor measurement. Moreover,
the stochastic components of the sensor errors are random and usually
contain several error sources. These errors are usually correlated with
time, in this paper, only static bias, dynamic bias and angle random
walk noise are taken into account due to they have the strongest
influence on INS performance. For gyroscope and accelerometer, the
measurement error model can be expressed as
𝛿𝜽= 𝛿𝑲𝜽+ 𝒆𝑏+ 𝒆𝑟+ 𝒘
(3)
where 𝜽= [
𝝎𝑏
𝑖𝑏
𝒇𝑏
𝑠𝑡
]𝑇denote the measured angular rate and accelera-
tion,
𝛿𝜽
is
the
corresponding
measurement
error,
𝛿𝑲= 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔{
𝛿𝑲𝐺
𝛿𝑲𝐴
} is the deterministic part of error and 𝒆𝑏=
[
𝜺𝑏
𝛁𝑏
]𝑇denote the static bias. 𝒘is the white noise with variances
𝝈2
𝑤, 𝒆𝑟= [
𝜺𝑟
𝛁𝑟
]𝑇represent the dynamic bias defined aṡ
𝒆𝑟= −𝝉𝒆𝑟+ 𝒘𝑟
(4)
where 𝝉= 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔{
1∕𝜏𝑔
1∕𝝉𝑎
} denote the correlation time associated
with the Gauss–Markov processes, 𝒘𝑟is the white noise with variances
𝝈2
𝑟.
By considering the dynamic bias as a stationary random process, the
mean and variance of sensor error model can be written as
𝐸{𝒛(𝑡)} = 𝛿𝑲𝜽+ (𝑰+ exp(−𝝉𝑡))𝒆𝑏= 𝛿𝑲𝜽+ 𝒆
(5a)
𝐷{𝒛(𝑡)} = 𝝈2
𝑟𝝉∕2 + 𝝉2
𝑤= 𝝈2
𝛿𝜃
(5b)
[p.4]
Measurement 192 (2022) 110797
4
J. Li et al.
where 𝒆= [
𝜺
𝛁
]𝑇is the sensor bias, and 𝝈2
(𝛿𝜃) =
[
𝝈2
(𝛿𝑤)
𝝈2
(𝛿𝑓)
]𝑇
denote the variance associate with stochastic error. The quality of iner-
tial measurements is determined by these parameters, which were set
different values to characterize different grade of INS in the simulation.
In addition, owing to the flight endurance for UAV is short and
directly related to the capacity of the battery, we simply suppose that
the time of UAVs entering GNSS-denied area is less than 1/4 Schuler
oscillation period of 84,4 min, thus the trigonometric function can be
simplified using small angle approximation. Note that the position error
equations with respect to the north and the east direction are in similar
form, we only consider the north position channel for simplicity. By
taking into account Eqs. (A.4a) and (A.4b), the statistical characteristics
of position estimation uncertainty then can be obtained as follows
𝐸{𝛿𝑝𝑁(𝑡)} ≈−𝑡3𝑔
6 (𝛿𝐾𝐺𝑥⋅𝜔𝑥+ 𝜀𝑥)𝐶𝑛
𝑏−𝑡3𝑓𝐸
6 (𝛿𝐾𝐺𝑧⋅𝜔𝑧+ 𝜀𝑧)𝐶𝑛
𝑏
+ 𝑡2
2 (𝛿𝐾𝐴𝑦⋅𝑓𝑦+ ∇𝑦)𝐶𝑛
𝑏
(6a)
𝐷{𝛿𝑝𝑁(𝑡)} ≈𝑡
2 (3𝜎2
(𝛿𝑤𝑥)𝑅2 −
3𝜎2
(𝛿𝑤𝑧)𝑅2𝑓2
𝐸
𝑔2
+
𝜎2
(𝛿𝑓𝑦)
𝑤2𝑠)𝐶𝑛
𝑏
−𝑡(2𝜎2
(𝛿𝑤𝐸)𝑅2 −
2𝜎2
(𝛿𝑤𝑧)𝑅2𝑓2
𝐸
𝑔2
)𝐶𝑛
𝑏
−𝑡(
𝜎2
(𝛿𝑓𝑦)
2𝑤2𝑠−
𝜎2
(𝛿𝑤𝑥)𝑅2
2
+
𝜎2
(𝛿𝑤𝑧)𝑅2𝑓2
𝐸
2𝑔2
)𝐶𝑛
𝑏
(6b)
where the subscript 𝑥, 𝑦and 𝑧denote the coordinate components in
body frame.
It is obvious that both the mean and variance of position uncertainty
increase with time. In particular, the mean value is mainly affected
by the deterministic parts of sensor measurements, which result in
uncertainty proportional to time cubed and squared respectively. Same
interest is the stochastic parts of sensor errors as they introduce the
variance of position uncertainty grows with
√
𝑡.
3.2. The position uncertainty model
To properly model the position errors, we consider the sum of the
mean and standard deviation of the position estimation uncertainty
as a whole, and propose a directional position uncertainty model as
describes below
𝑈(𝑡)
𝑝𝑁= 𝐸{𝛿𝑝𝑁(𝑡)} +
√
𝐷{𝛿𝑝𝑁(𝑡)}.
(7)
The Eq. (8) gives the INS-based position estimation uncertainty as
a function of three different type of factors. The first type is dynamic
characteristics of UAV, which would stimulate the residual scale factor
errors and introduce a position uncertainty proportional to the rotation
and acceleration rate. The second factor is the precision of inertial
sensor. Usually the inertial sensors tend to dictate the quality of IMU
and thus the accuracy of algorithm output. Finally, the third factor
is the time interval of GNSS signal lost. Given the same quality INS,
the UAV enters the GNSS-denied area for a much shorter duration has
significantly smaller position uncertainty than other UAVs.
Furthermore, an agent in cooperative navigation network can be
thought of as an anchor when the directional position uncertainty
is zero along any direction (e.g., when UAV aided by map match-
ing technology). To provide the insights into the connection between
theoretical and algorithmic perspective, given the same grade of INS
and duration of maneuver, a visual illustration of dynamic position
uncertainty is shown in Fig. 3.
As can be seen in Fig. 3, the position error not only depends on
the performance of the sensors but also includes dynamic effects. The
true position error value is fluctuating according to the acceleration
and turning rate. The model based approximated error can adapt the
real position error changes with the same tendency. Note that the pro-
posed directional position uncertainty model can only approximate the
accumulated errors under short-term condition, due to the neglection
of coupling term and small angle approximation.
Fig. 3. The comparison of the true error value with 3000 samples (black dash net) and
the approximated value (colored surface) from directional position uncertainty model.
The blue surface indicate error on a stational base.
4. UAV swarm cooperative navigation algorithm
The directional position uncertainty model is not only helpful to
assess the localization accuracy, it can also be fed into a decentralized
Bayesian cooperative navigation algorithm to improve the prediction
accuracy online. In this section, we propose a weighted uncertainty
belief propagation algorithm termed as WUBP to alleviate the impact
of IMU errors, which is based on the theory of factor graphs and the
sum–product algorithm (SPA). The proposed algorithm aims to slow
down the position error growth and improve the localization accuracy
under GNSS-denied environment.
According to the update rule of message passing [21] on a factor
graph, the whole process of proposed WUBP algorithm for each UAV
can be summarized by three key steps. In the following, we will
introduce them in detail.
4.1. Design of the position prediction
For the first step, a UAV predicted belief is computed based on its
positional
estimate
at
the
last
timestep
and
mobility
model
𝑝(𝑥(t)
𝑖|𝑥(t−1)
𝑖
, 𝑧𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓) combined with position uncertainty. Suppose that the
predicted belief of UAV at time t is represented by a finite set of
particles with associated weights 𝑏𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖) =
{
x(𝑡)
𝑝𝑟𝑒,𝑘,𝑖, w(𝑡)
𝑝𝑟𝑒,𝑘,𝑖
}𝑅
𝑘=1. As
barometers are used to ensure the UAVs maintain a stable altitude, we
assume the UAVs navigating in planes of different altitude. Each UAV
can only predict their position x(𝑡)
𝑝𝑟𝑒,𝑖with INS
x(𝑡)
𝑝𝑟𝑒,𝑖=̂ x(𝑡−1)
𝑖
+ 𝑓(𝛺)
(8)
wherê x(𝑡−1)
𝑖
is the position estimate at the last timestep, and 𝑓(𝛺) is
the position increment of INS.
Then a position uncertainty matrix 𝑼(𝑡)
𝑖
= 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔
{
𝑈(𝑡)
𝑝𝑁,𝑖
𝑈(𝑡)
𝑝𝐸,𝑖
}
is calculated according to Eq. (8). Consequently, the predicted belief
𝑏𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖) can be obtained by directly drawing 𝑅independent particles
from distribution 𝑁
(
x(𝑡)
𝑝𝑟𝑒,𝑖, 𝑼(𝑡)
𝑖
)
with equal weight. The position uncer-
tainty matrix 𝑼(𝑡)
𝑖
is employed to approximate the inertial navigation
accumulated errors with respect to main influence factors. Such a
design is able to compensate the inertial measurement errors. Fig. 4
exhibits the basic idea of the proposed position prediction step.
In Fig. 4, the red dots in Zone 1 denote the past belief distribution.
The predicted position given by INS is represented by the magenta
particles in Zone 2, which obviously do not include the real position.
The state-of-the-art method in [14] address this problem by designing
[p.5]
Measurement 192 (2022) 110797
5
J. Li et al.
Fig. 4. The position prediction method is able to filter particles near the real position
in Zone 3.
a gradually increasing variance to approximate the accumulation of
the measurement errors, which is able to make the particles of the
prediction (Zone 4) always cover the true position. However, it is failed
to determine the position estimation uncertainty for different influence
factors and to correctly represent the probability density distribution,
leading to limited performance improvement.
Alternatively, given an initial position distribution and sensor mea-
surements, the proposed prediction method is able to characterize the
position error evolution and covers the true position with a much
smaller area termed as Zone 3, in which the blue and green ellipse
denote position estimation uncertainty caused by different maneuvers.
The key point of our design is to cover the real position area with
higher particle density by simulating the error accumulation of UAV
position, it is vital to obtain desirable positional estimates. In addition,
the proposed method is more robust when the UAV maneuvers, which
can be ascribed to the consideration of dynamic error characteristics.
With the information fusion operation introduced later in the third step,
the particles near the true position in Zone 3 can be filtered out.
4.2. Message computing
The next step is to compute the incoming messages. According to
the correction step of BP, the incoming messages can be interpreted
as relative observation of UAV from its neighbor, which are related to
the relative signal metrics and predicted beliefs of neighbors. Note that
only a set of parameters in the Gaussian distribution are transmitted
to reduce the communication cost. In the proposed algorithm, we set
the number of messages passing iterations to one due to each UAV is
able to obtain a prior knowledge of position based on its own inertial
measurements. Consequently, the incoming messages can be rewritten
as:
𝑚(𝑡)
𝑗→𝑖(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖) ∝∫𝑝(𝑧(𝑡)
𝑗→𝑖|𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖, 𝑥(𝑡)
𝑗) ⋅𝑏𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑗)𝑑𝑥(𝑡)
𝑗.
(9)
The incoming messages can be interpreted as relative observation
of UAV from its neighbor, which is represented by a set of parameters
from distribution 𝑁
(
x(𝑡)
𝑗, 𝑼(𝑡)
𝑗
)
to reduce the communication cost. To
obtain a particle representation
{
x(𝑡)
𝑚,𝑘,𝑗→𝑖, w(𝑡)
𝑚,𝑘,𝑖
}𝑅
𝑘=1 of the incoming
message 𝑚(𝑡)
𝑗→𝑖(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖), we first draw particles
{
x(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖, w(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖
}𝑅
𝑘=1 from dis-
tribution 𝑁
(
x(𝑡)
𝑝𝑟𝑒,𝑗, 𝑼(𝑡)
𝑗
)
as the representation of the received belief.
As for the distance measurements obtained by the radio signal metrics
𝑝(𝑧(𝑡)
𝑗→𝑖|𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖, 𝑥(𝑡)
𝑗), we draw particles of measured inter-node distancê 𝑑(𝑡)
𝑗→𝑖
from a Gaussian distribution 𝑁(̂𝑑(𝑡)
𝑗→𝑖, 𝜎2
𝑑,𝑗→𝑖), as well as particles of angle
𝜙(𝑡)
𝑘
from a uniform distribution on (0, 2𝜋]. Note that the weights of
particles remain unchanged due to the cooperative estimate has not
been computed yet. Each particle of incoming messages is then given
by:
𝑥(𝑡)
𝑚,𝑘,𝑗→𝑖= 𝑥(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖+ 𝑑(𝑡)
𝑘[sin(𝜙(𝑡)
𝑘); cos(𝜙(𝑡)
𝑘)].
(10)
4.3. Design of the PII and location estimate
The third step is to update belief by fusing information from the
position prediction with incoming messages. Since each incoming mes-
sage contains positional estimate with different uncertainty, treating
these messages in equal can easily lead to inaccurate estimates. To
suppress this adverse impact, a nonnegative number called the position
information intensity (PII) is proposed, which is able to characterizes
the uncertainty of position and tune the weights of incoming messages
for information fusion.
In the UAV cooperative navigation system, upon the arrival of the
broadcasted packets from neighbors 𝑗∈𝛤𝑖, the position information
intensity corresponding to UAV can be expressed as:
𝑤𝑖𝑗(𝑡) =
{1 + (𝐽𝑖{𝑝(𝑡)} −𝐽𝑗{𝑝(𝑡)}
)∕𝑐
if𝐽𝑖{𝑝(𝑡)} > 𝐽𝑗{𝑝(𝑡)}
𝐽𝑖{𝑝(𝑡)}∕𝐽𝑗{𝑝(𝑡)}
if𝐽𝑖{𝑝(𝑡)} ≤𝐽𝑗{𝑝(𝑡)}
(11)
where 𝑐is the scaling factor with respect to IMU quality, 𝐽𝑖{𝑝(𝑡)} denote
the integrated position uncertainty of UAV 𝑖, which can be derived as:
𝐽𝑖{𝑝(𝑡)} =
√
(𝑈(𝑡)
𝑝𝑁,𝑖)
2 + (𝑈(𝑡)
𝑝𝐸,𝑖)
2.
(12)
After all position information intensity of UAV 𝑖have been cal-
culated, they are normalized by their sum. The introduced position
precision coefficient 𝑤𝑖𝑗(𝑡) takes advantage of different impact factors
to balance the contribution of incoming messages. More specifically,
incoming messages with greater uncertainty are given a lower value,
and vice versa. Given the particle representation of position prediction
and incoming messages, kernel density estimation (KDE) [22] is applied
here to translate the particles into distribution. For a particle set
{x𝑘, w𝑘
}𝐾
𝑘=1 of a distribution 𝑝(𝑥), and the KDE of 𝑝(𝑥) can be obtained
as:̂
𝑝(𝑥) =
𝐾
∑
𝑘=1
𝑤𝑘𝐾𝜎(𝑥−𝑥𝑘)𝑥
(13)
where 𝐾𝜎=
1
2𝜋𝜎2 exp(−‖𝑥‖2
2𝜎2 ) is the Gaussian kernel with bandwidth
𝜎. The bandwidth 𝜎is determined by the ranging measurements [23],
which is crucial for the performance of the estimate.
Let̂ 𝑏𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖) and̂ 𝑚(𝑡)
𝑗→𝑖(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖) be the KDEs of predicted belief and the
incoming messages, respectively. Then the belief can be updated by:
𝑏(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖) ∝̂ 𝑏𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖)
∏
𝑗∈𝛤(𝑡)
𝑖
𝑤𝑖𝑗(𝑡)̂𝑚𝑗→𝑖(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖).
(14)
Due to the difficulty of directly sampling from target distribution
𝑏(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖), importance sampling method [24] is used here to address these
difficulties. With the principles of the importance sampling, we draw
equal-weight particles from a distribution 𝑞(𝑥) that is easy to sample
from, and then reweight all the particles by:
𝑣(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖∝̂
𝑏𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖) ∏
𝑗∈𝛤(𝑡)
𝑖
𝑤𝑖𝑗(𝑡)̂𝑚𝑗→𝑖(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖)
𝑞(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖)
(15)
where distribution 𝑞(𝑥) = ∑
𝑗∈𝛤(𝑡)
𝑖̂
𝑚𝑗→𝑖(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖) is a mixture of the incom-
ing messages. After normalization and resampling operations, the belief
of UAV 𝑖could be represented by the particle set 𝐵(𝑡)
𝑖
=
{
x(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖, 𝑣(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖
}𝐾
𝑘=1,
which is an approximation of the posteriori distribution. Consequently,
the particles near the real position are filtered out from the prediction
with the incoming messages.
[p.6]
Measurement 192 (2022) 110797
6
J. Li et al.
Table 1
Simulation settings.
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
Simulation time
100 s
Initial velocity
2 m/s
Gyroscope drift 𝜀
1◦∕h
Accelerometer bias ∇
1 mg
Noise of gyroscope 𝜎(𝛿𝑤)
0.1◦∕h
Noise of accelerometer 𝜎(𝛿𝑓)
0.1 mg
Correlation time 𝜏
300 s
Scale factor error
100 ppm
Ranging standard deviation
0.2 m
Particle number 𝑀
500
Hence the minimum mean square error (MMSE) estimate of UAV
can be provided by the mean of the posterior distribution as follows:̂
𝑥(𝑡)
𝑀𝑀𝑆𝐸,𝑖=
𝐾
∑
𝑘=1
𝑣(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖x(𝑡)
𝑏,𝑘,𝑖.
(16)
Algorithm 1 Outline of WUBP Algorithm at Timestep 𝑡
1: for each UAV 𝑖∈[1, 𝑁] do
2:
compute position estimate x(𝑡)
𝑝𝑟𝑒,𝑖and uncertainty matrix 𝑈(𝑡)
𝑖
according to Eq. (8) and Eq. (7)
3:
broadcast predicted belief 𝑏𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖)
4:
receive beliefs from neighbors 𝑗∈𝛤𝑖and extracts signal metrics
𝑧(𝑡)
𝑗→𝑖
5:
compute incoming messages 𝑚(𝑡)
𝑗→𝑖(𝑥(𝑡)
𝑖) according to Eq. (10)
6:
compute
and
normalize
the
position
information
intensity
according to Eq. (11)
7:
draw equal-weight particles from distribution 𝑞(𝑥) and compute
corresponding weights according to Eq. (15)
8:
get 𝐵(𝑡)
𝑖
by normalizing the weights and resampling
9:
compute the MMSE position estimatê 𝑥(𝑡)
𝑀𝑀𝑆𝐸,𝑖according to Eq.
(16)
10: end for
5. Simulations
In this section, we evaluate the performance benefits of the pro-
posed methods by comparing with the state-of-the-art methods in two
simulation scenarios: the dynamic maneuver scenario and the cruise
scenario. The inputs to the simulation are simulated measurements and
noises obtained from the inertial sensors. In the simulation, the impact
of several key parameters was examined.
5.1. Simulation setup
Consider a team of UAVs enters GNSS-denied zone with an initial
position error of 0.5 m and thereafter entirely counts on cooperative
navigation to mitigate the INS error growth. UAVs are equipped with
both IMU and UWB, and their sampling rates are set to be 10 Hz
and 1 Hz respectively. To keep consistency with the setup in the real
experiment, noise characteristics of IMU are based on parameters taken
from real sensors. The ranging and bearing observations are provided
by UWB module with errors following zero-mean Gaussian distribu-
tion. We setup scenarios with different generated UAV trajectories in
Fig. 5, and the root mean square error (RMSE) is considered as the
performance metric.
5.2. Effect of maneuvers on RMSE
To demonstrate the performance gain provided by the exploitation
of the directional position uncertainty model and position information
intensity, WUBP algorithm and the state-of-the-art methods are com-
pared. In Fig. 5(a), the UAV team traveling directly North under three
operating conditions: UAV 1, 2 and 5 follow a smooth flight path; UAV
3 performs dynamic maneuvers including acceleration and decelera-
tion; UAV 4 performs spiral maneuver. The parameters of simulation
conditions are depicted in Table 1. We evaluate the algorithms using
Monte-Carlo simulation with 100 times. The RMSE against the time
of navigation is shown in Fig. 6. We also validate the performance of
these methods on different dynamic conditions as shown in Fig. 7. The
acceleration and rotation velocity of UAV 3 and 4 in Fig. 6(a) is chosen
to be (0.5, 1), (1, 2), (2, 4), (4, 6). The following key observations can
be obtained:
(1) All of three algorithms can slow down the INS error divergence,
while the proposed algorithm gives the best localization accuracy.
The inferior performance of SPBP [23] algorithm mainly results from
the neglect of accumulated inertial measurement errors in the system
dynamic model. Consequently, the particles from predicted beliefs are
placed outside the region of true position and the resulting performance
is poor.
(2) In the BPUCL [14] algorithm, an accumulated variance is de-
signed to simulate the error accumulation of the inertial measurement,
which improve the predicted beliefs notably. However, the BPUCL
algorithm is unable to properly characterize UAV position estima-
tion uncertainty and qualify the reliability of information provided by
different UAVs, especially when the position errors grow large.
(3) It can be observed from Fig. 7 that the dynamic maneuver
significantly produces negative effect on the localization accuracy. The
best accuracy is obtained with the proposed WUBP method, meanwhile
it outperforms the others BP-based methods in terms of robustness.
The reason for this can be explained as follow: since the proposed
directional position uncertainty model can approximate the short-term
theoretical accuracy with the effective factors, the impact of dynamic
maneuver is alleviated in the proposed algorithm. In addition, owing
to the utilization of the position information intensity based on direc-
tional position uncertainty model, the influence of unreliable position
information is reduced.
5.3. Evaluation of sensor quality and particle numbers
In the next scenario as shown in Fig. 5(b), the position accuracy
of SPBP, BPUCL and proposed algorithm under the impact of various
inertial sensor bias (i.e., 𝜀and ∇) is analyzed. The scenario condition is
set as follows: UAVs are cruising toward north, UAV 2–5 are equipped
with the same grade of INS as depicted in Table 1, while UAV 1 is
equipped with different grade of INS (shown in the abscissa axis). The
performance under the influence of various INS settings is shown in
Fig. 8, and the impact of particle numbers on position accuracy is
analyzed in Fig. 9. The following two observations can be made:
(1) The RMSE of the three algorithms all increase with INS error,
while the proposed algorithm maintains the best navigation accuracy.
Similar as the previous scenario, the cause for poor performance of
SPBP also lies in not taking accumulated errors into consideration. As
for BPUCL, although the accumulated error is considered, the weights
of particles are calculated by the means of importance sampling and
received information are treated equally, resulting in introducing neg-
ative impact of unreliable information in the fusion process and thus
higher errors than the proposed algorithm. It should be mentioned that
the factor about time interval of GNSS signal lost has the same property.
(2) It can be observed that the RMSE of both methods are dropped
as the number of particles increase. This is due to the fact that the
algorithm performance is highly sensitive to the quality of prediction,
and the probability of true position value covered would rise with
the number of particles. Moreover, the proposed method outperforms
BPUCL given the same number of particles. The main reason is that,
compared to BPUCL, the proposed WUBP method can achieve higher
density because of utilizing the directional position uncertainty model.
Remark 1. These observations of different simulation scenarios indi-
cate that the entire group can reap the benefits of accurate positional
estimate from UAVs with less maneuvers, higher-grade of INS or shorter
time interval of GNSS signal lost, which is a valid proof for navigation
performance improvement. In addition, these results may provide the
insights into the connection between formation control schemes and
decentralized swarm localization algorithm.
[p.7]
Measurement 192 (2022) 110797
7
J. Li et al.
Fig. 5.
The trajectories related to UAVs in one simulation run. Colored and black curves represent the INS and true trajectories, respectively.
Fig. 6. Positioning error at different timestamps.
Fig. 7. Evaluation of the position accuracy under the influence of UAV dynamic
maneuvers.
6. Real world experiments
In this section, we present a real world experiment with simultane-
ous moving unmanned vehicles to reveal the superior performance of
the proposed WUBP algorithm.
Fig. 8. Analysis of the performance under the influence of various INS settings.
Fig. 9. Evaluation of the impact of particle numbers on the position accuracy.
6.1. System configuration
As shown in Fig. 10, onboard IMU YIS370-U1 is used to perform
dead reckoning with strapdown inertial navigation algorithm. The
sensor is integrated on vehicle board. In addition, we equipped each
1 www.yesense.com/yis370.
[p.8]
Measurement 192 (2022) 110797
8
J. Li et al.
Fig. 10. Data collection in the building and sensors carried by a vehicle.
Table 2
Experimental results for position error.
Method
INS only
WUBP
BPUCL
SPBP
Position error
8.69 m
6.58 m
7.33 m
7.88 m
Improvement
–
24.3%
15.6%
9.3%
unmanned vehicle with UWB transceiver from Nooloop,2 which has
been securely mounted on the vehicle. The UWB system is capable of
performing communication while providing peer-to-peer range mea-
surements with an accuracy of 10 cm. The data were collected in
real-time and stored on the embedded board of vehicles, which includes
INS outputs for all vehicles (100 Hz), predicted beliefs from data
transmission (10 Hz) and inter-vehicle ranges (10 Hz). These data sets
were then post processed in MATLAB to evaluate the algorithms. Based
on the sensor characteristics, the parameters are set as follows: 𝜀=
5◦∕h, ∇= 0.5 mg, 𝜎(𝛿𝑤) = 0.5◦∕h, 𝜎(𝛿𝑓) = 0.1 mg, 𝑀= 1000.
The real world experiment has been performed in the university
building. As depicted in Fig. 11, six UWB transceivers anchored at the
hallway to provide ground truth in the indoor environment. The UWB
transceivers are placed on the same plane with tripods, and the indoor
local coordinate system is built by precisely measuring the distance
between them. Once the communication between the UWB transceivers
and the laptop was established, all the vehicles began to move from
outside of building to inside. This design means to simulate the robots
enter a GNSS-denied environment. Note that the initial information
of position and orientation can be obtained from INS/GPS integrated
navigation mode while vehicles are moving outside of the building.
To verify the performance of cooperative navigation under dynamic
conditions, five set of tests were conducted with different maneuvers.
The path of different vehicles is shown in Fig. 11. Vehicle 1 and
vehicle 2 are programmed with the robot operating system (ROS) to
smoothly move in straight lines and enter the building relatively late,
which are considered to be nodes with higher position information
intensity. The other vehicles are programmed to move with several
different maneuvers. Each vehicle concurrently performs ranging and
communication.
6.2. Experimental results
The performance is evaluated by collecting the trajectory of each
vehicle and plotting the 2-𝜎confidence ellipses as shown in Fig. 12,
and the results for the absolute position errors is shown in Table 2.
2 www.nooploop.com.
Fig. 11. The path of different vehicles and experimental setup.
As can be seen in Fig. 12(a), SPBP has the worst performance both
in the 𝑥direction and 𝑦direction. Meanwhile, WUBP has the smallest
axis of confidence ellipse among the three algorithms and achieves a
positioning accuracy of 6.58 m. In addition, Fig. 12(b) visualizes the
trajectory of vehicle with maneuvering. By incorporating the proposed
position uncertainty model and position information intensity in the
cooperative navigation process, WUBP can follow the maneuvering
track of the vehicle and significantly improves the position accuracy
in comparison to BPUCL method.
Fig. 13 illustrate the RMSE of position estimates with respect to
different methods. Similar to the findings in the simulation, the advan-
tages of WUBP can be clearly seen in the case when vehicles performing
maneuvers, in which the vehicle 3, 4 and 5 have greater position errors.
6.3. Discussion
The results of real world experiments indicate that the proposed
WUBP method gives the best localization accuracy and is more robust
with vehicle maneuvers. The reason for this can be explained as follow:
since the directional position uncertainty model can approximate the
associated uncertainty of position estimates with different influence fac-
tors, the particles in the proposed WUBP algorithm may precisely cover
the real position and alleviate the impact of dynamic maneuvers. In ad-
dition, owing to the utilization of the position information intensity, the
weights of navigation information from different vehicles can be tuned
[p.9]
Measurement 192 (2022) 110797
9
J. Li et al.
Fig. 12.
The trajectory (vehicle 3) of different methods and the error confidence ellipses from indoor navigation experiment.
Fig. 13. The RMSE of position estimates against different vehicles.
adaptively based on single vehicle navigation performance, making the
whole system receive more benefit from cooperative navigation.
Furthermore, since predicting upper bounds for the position errors
in real world is more challenging, the performance of WUBP algorithm
is poor when compared to the result in the simulation. In particular, the
errors of IMU are highly instable due to the quality of MEMS inertial
sensor, leading to a decrease in the accuracy of estimated uncertainty.
Thus, a better position accuracy can be achieved if we use higher grade
IMU sensors.
7. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose the WUBP algorithm to alleviate the im-
pact of accumulated error induced by INS and enhance the performance
of the cooperative navigation system in GNSS-denied areas. First, we
derived the directional position uncertainty model under dynamic con-
ditions to characterize the position estimations, providing insights into
the relationship between the uncertainty of position estimation and
effective factors. Second, we designed the position information inten-
sity to reflect the quality of position estimate and tune the weights
of incoming messages for information fusion. The experimental results
show that WUBP outperforms the state-of-the-art BP-based methods in
terms of accuracy, and 24.3% precision improvement can be achieved.
Besides, the performance of our method is fundamentally limited due
to the instable random noise from inertial sensor and the short-time
approximation in the analytical expressions of position error, resulting
in an accuracy degrade with a long flight.
One of future work is to combine with a path planning strat-
egy and to design a cooperative guidance algorithm that commands
specific maneuvers to further limit position estimation error growth.
Another interesting future work would be the incorporation with map-
aided, visual and magnetic field-based methods for a more robust and
comprehensive GNSS-denied cooperative navigation strategy.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jian Li: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing – orig-
inal draft. Gongliu Yang: Supervision. Qingzhong Cai: Visualization,
Investigation, Reviewing and editing. Haofei Niu: Data curation. Jing
Li: Software, Validation.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
This work is funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 61803015).
Appendix
We consider the navigation frame (n-frame) as the East-North-Up
(E-N-U) geography frame. Let 𝑖, 𝑏and 𝑒denote the inertial frame,
the body frame and the earth frame respectively. The nonlinear error
differential equations of INS can be formulated as:̇
𝝓= 𝝓× (𝝎𝑛
𝑖𝑒+ 𝝎𝑛
𝑒𝑛) + 𝛿𝝎𝑛
𝑖𝑛−𝐶𝑛
𝑏𝛿𝝎𝑏
𝑖𝑏
(A.1a)
𝛿̇𝒗𝑛= 𝒇𝑛
𝑠𝑓× 𝝓+ 𝒗𝑛× (2𝛿𝝎𝑛
𝑖𝑒+ 𝛿𝝎𝑛
𝑒𝑛) −(2𝝎𝑛
𝑖𝑒+ 𝝎𝑛
𝑒𝑛) × 𝛿𝒗𝑛+ 𝐶𝑛
𝑏𝛿𝒇𝑏
𝑠𝑡
(A.1b)
𝛿̇𝒑=
[
0
1∕𝑅
0
sec 𝐿∕𝑅
0
0
]
𝛿𝒗𝒏
(A.1c)
where 𝛿𝒗𝑛, 𝝓and 𝛿𝒑are respectively the error vector of velocity,
attitude and position in n-frame, 𝐶𝑛
𝑏denote the transformation matrix
from the b-frame to the n-frame, 𝝎𝑛
𝑖𝑒is the rotational angular velocity
of the earth, 𝝎𝑛
𝑒𝑛is the angular velocity of the vehicle relative to the
earth, 𝛿𝝎𝑛
𝑖𝑒and 𝛿𝝎𝑛
𝑒𝑛represent the corresponding errors, 𝑅is the mean
radius of the Earth, 𝒇𝑛
𝑠𝑓= [𝑓𝐸, 𝑓𝑁, 𝑓𝑈]𝑇is acceleration in n-frame, 𝐿
[p.10]
Measurement 192 (2022) 110797
10
J. Li et al.
is the latitude, 𝛿𝒇𝑏
𝑠𝑡and 𝛿𝝎𝑏
𝑖𝑏are measurement error of accelerometer
and gyroscope.
For inertia sensors used in UAV, the magnitude of angular velocity
and acceleration error induced by carrier maneuver is much larger
than that of Earth rotation rate as well as the second and third terms
on the righthand side of Eq. (A.1b). Thus, these terms can be safely
ignored. In view of the above considerations, the complete and complex
system error differential Eq. (A.1) can be simplified and summarized in
a compact form as:̇
𝑿= 𝑭𝑿+ 𝑩
(A.2)
where
𝑿
=
[
𝜙𝐸
𝜙𝑁
𝜙𝑈
𝛿𝑣𝐸
𝛿𝑣𝑁
𝛿𝑝𝑁
𝛿𝑝𝐸
]𝑇
denote
the
UAV
error
state
vector,
and
𝑩
=
[
−𝛿𝜔𝐸
−𝛿𝜔𝑁
−𝛿𝜔𝑈
𝛿𝑓𝐸
𝛿𝑓𝑁
0
0
]𝑇is the sensor error in
n-frame. The coefficient matrix 𝐹can be rewritten as:
𝑭=
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
03×3
𝑴1
03×2
𝑴2
02×2
02×2
02×3
𝑴3
02×2
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
where 𝑴1
=
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
0
−1∕𝑅
1∕𝑅
0
tan 𝐿∕𝑅
0
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
, 𝑴2
=
[0
−𝑔
𝑓𝑁
𝑔
0
−𝑓𝐸
]
, 𝑴3
=
[ 0
1∕𝑅
1∕𝑅
0
]
.
For tractability of analysis, we neglect the Foucault frequency and
the coupling term of earth rotation velocity, then the time-domain
solution of simplified system position error differential equation can
be expressed as a Gauss–Markov process:
𝛿𝒑(𝑡) = 𝝓(𝑡)𝑿(0) + ∫
𝑡
0
𝝓(𝑡−𝜏)𝑩𝑑𝜏
(A.3)
where
𝝓(𝑡)
=
[
𝑅(1 −cos 𝜔𝑠𝑡)
0
𝑓𝐸𝑅
𝑔(cos 𝜔𝑠𝑡−1)
0
sin 𝜔𝑠𝑡
𝜔𝑠
1
0
0
𝑅(1 −cos 𝜔𝑠𝑡)
𝑓𝑁𝑅
𝑔(1 −cos 𝜔𝑠𝑡)
sin 𝜔𝑠𝑡
𝜔𝑠
0
0
1
]
,
𝜔𝑠=
√
𝑔∕𝑅is the Schuler angular frequency, 𝑿(0) is the initial error
state.
Generally, the sensor error often incorporates deterministic as well
as stochastic components. For the purpose of characterizing the position
error accumulation, consider the sensor error as constant or stationary
random process respectively, then the mean and covariance of position
errors 𝛿𝒑(𝑡) can be expressed as:
𝐸{𝛿𝒑(𝑡)} = 𝝓(𝑡)𝐸{𝑿(0)} + ∫
𝑡
0
𝝓(𝑡−𝜏)𝑩𝑑𝜏
(A.4a)
𝐷{𝛿𝒑(𝑡)} = 𝝓(𝑡)𝑃{𝑿(0)} 𝝓𝑇(𝑡) + ∫
𝑡
0
𝝓(𝑡−𝜏)𝑩(𝜏)𝑩𝑇(𝜏)𝝓𝑇(𝑡−𝜏)𝑑𝜏
(A.4b)
where 𝑃{𝑿(0)} and 𝐸{𝑿(0)} denote the mean vector and the covari-
ance matrix of initial error state.
References
[1] S. Zhang, R. Pöhlmann, T. Wiedemann, A. Dammann, H. Wymeersch, P.A.
Hoeher, Self-aware swarm navigation in autonomous exploration missions, Proc.
IEEE 108 (7) (2020) 1168–1195.
[2] L. Paull, S. Saeedi, M. Seto, H. Li, AUV navigation and localization: A review,
IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 39 (1) (2014) 131–149.
[3] E. Kim, D. Choi, A UWB positioning network enabling unmanned aircraft systems
auto land, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 58 (2016) 418–426.
[4] S. Wang, X. Zhan, Y. Zhai, J. Shen, H. Wang, Performance estimation for Kalman
filter based multi-agent cooperative navigation by employing graph theory,
Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 112 (2021) 106628.
[5] R. Liu, C. Yuen, T. Do, M. Zhang, Y.L. Guan, U. Tan, Cooperative positioning
for emergency responders using self IMU and peer-to-peer radios measurements,
Inf. Fusion 56 (2020) 93–102.
[6] P.
Fang,
W.
Jun,
X.
Jian-jun,
S.
Yi-chao,
An
optimization
method
of
airborne radar and IRST cooperative location based on ridge regression, in: 2018
International Conference on Electronics Technology (ICET), 2018, pp. 365–372.
[7] S. Salari, I. Kim, F. Chan, Distributed cooperative localization for mobile wireless
sensor networks, IEEE Commun. Lett. 7 (1) (2018) 18–21.
[8] S. Wang, F. Luo, X. Jing, L. Zhang, Low complexity message-passing cooperative
localization in wireless sensor networks, IEEE Commun. Lett. 21 (9) (2017)
2081–2084.
[9] A.A. Kannan, G. Mao, B. Vucetic, Simulated annealing based wireless sensor
network localization, J. Comput. 1 (2) (2006) 15–22.
[10] Q. Li, B. Chu, Z. Wu, W. Sun, L. Chen, J. Li, Z. Liu, RMDS: Ranging and
multidimensional scaling-based anchor-free localization in large-scale wireless
sensor networks with coverage holes, Int. J. Distrib. Sensor Netw. 13 (8) (2017)
1–17.
[11] O. Kwon, H. Song, S. Park, The effects of stitching orders in patch-and-stitch
WSN localization algorithms, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 20 (9) (2009)
1380–1391.
[12] J. Xiong, Z. Xiong, J.W. Cheong, J. Xu, A.G. Dempster, Cooperative positioning
for low-cost close formation flight based on relative estimation and belief
propagation, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 106 (2020) 106068.
[13] Y. Li, Y. Wang, W. Yu, X. Guan, Multiple autonomous underwater vehicle
cooperative localization in anchor-free environments, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 4 (4)
(2019) 895–911.
[14] Y. Li, L. Liu, W. Yu, Y. Wang, X. Guan, Noncooperative mobile target tracking
using multiple AUVs in anchor-free environments, IEEE Internet Things J. 7 (10)
(2020) 9819–9833.
[15] B. Etzlinger, F. Meyer, F. Hlawatsch, A. Springer, H. Wymeersch, Cooperative
simultaneous localization and synchronization in mobile agent networks, IEEE
Trans. Signal Process. 65 (14) (2017) 3587–3602.
[16] Y.
Shen,
H.
Wymeersch,
M.Z.
Win,
Fundamental
limits
of
wideband
localization— Part II: Cooperative networks, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory 56 (10)
(2010) 4981–5000.
[17] A. Altan, R. Hacıoğlu, Model predictive control of three-axis gimbal system
mounted on UAV for real-time target tracking under external disturbances, Mech.
Syst. Signal Process. 138 (2020) 106548.
[18] A. Altan, Performance of metaheuristic optimization algorithms based on swarm
intelligence in attitude and altitude control of unmanned aerial vehicle for path
following, in: 4th International Symposium on Multidisciplinary Studies and
Innovative Technologies, 2020.
[19] A. Altan, O. Aslan, R. Hacıoğlu, Real-time control based on NARX neural network
of hexarotor UAV with load transporting system for path tracking, in: 6th
International Conference on Control Engineering and Information Technology,
2018.
[20] F. Daum, J. Huang, Curse of dimensionality and particle filters, in: Proc. IEEE
Aerospace Conf. 2003, pp. 1979–1993.
[21] F. Meyer, O. Hlinka, H. Wymeersch, E. Riegler, F. Hlawatsch, Distributed
localization and tracking of mobile networks including noncooperative objects,
IEEE Trans. Signal Inf. Process. 2 (1) (2016) 57–71.
[22] B.W. Silverman, Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis, Chapman
and Hall, New York, 1986.
[23] F. Meyer, O. Hlinka, F. Hlawatsch, Sigma point belief propagation, IEEE Signal
Process. Lett. 21 (2) (2014) 145–149.
[24] A. Doucet, N. De Freitas, N. Gordon, Sequential Monte Carlo Methods in Practice,
Springer, New York, 2001.
=== END ===
