warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1002.pdf
sha256: E1338946823FBCC0A9AA1C0B2AA92337F5FAA77C3A75F3C3E538E749C8B8BE4D
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 6
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
An Integrated UAV Navigation System Based on
Geo-registered 3D Point Cloud
Shuai Zhang1, Shuaijun Wang1, Chengyang Li1, Guocheng Liu1 and Qi Hao1,2
Abstract— The autonomous navigation of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) require a lot of sensing modalities to im-
prove their cruise efﬁciency. This paper presents a system for
autonomous navigation and path planning of UAVs in GPS-
denied environment based on the fusion of geo-registered 3D
point clouds with proprioceptive sensors (IMU, odometry and
barometer) and the 2D Google maps. The contributions of this
paper are illustrated as follows: 1) combination of 2D map and
geo-registered 3D point clouds; 2) registration of local point
cloud to global geo-registered 3D point clouds; 3) integration
of visual odometry, IMU, GPS and barometer. Experiment and
simulation results demonstrate the efﬁcacy and robustness of
the proposed system.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the recent years, quadrotor UAVs have drawn a lot of
attentions from both military and urban civil applications due
to their small size, low cost, hovering capability, and high
maneuverability [1]. Those civil applications include surveil-
lance and monitoring, disaster and emergency managemen-
t, precise agriculture, power line and pipeline inspection,
search and rescue, aerial photography, etc. Those military
applications include supply transportation, reconnaissance
and surveillance, border control, electronic warfare, etc [2].
Reliable navigation and path planning are keys to au-
tonomous UAV technologies, which rely on the accurate
self-location techniques through using GPS signals, IMUs
and barometers. However, the GPS signals can be interfered
for various reasons, such as extreme atmospheric conditions,
obstacles and terrains, television broadcast, and inconvenient
positions of satellites [3].
And IMUs are prone to generate systematic errors: when
GPS signals are unavailable or corrupted, the estimate of
UAV states(position, velocity and attitude) provided by IMUs
alone will drift quickly and be unreliable after a few second-
s [4]. Besides, when a UAV is close to the ground, neither
GPS nor IMU nor pressure based barometer can provide
accurate measurements of its vertical position and movement.
All of the above ﬁnally cause errors in UAV self-localization
results.
For path planning of UAVs, especially in large area, it
is an imperative task about seeking an optimal or near-
optimal ﬂight path between a starting point and the desired
destination point considering the different kinds of constrains
under complex dynamic ﬁeld environment. Many methods
have been proposed for UAV path planning, such as artiﬁcial
potential ﬁeld (APF) method, evolutionary computation, A*
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University
of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China
2Corresponding author: Qi Hao (haoq@sustc.edu.cn).
algorithm, genetic algorithm and so on [5]. However, those
methods can hardly solve the contradiction between the
global optimization and excessive information [6].
Autonomous UAVs require reliable path planning and
navigation. However, those technical challenges should be
overcome:
1) accurate and reliable navigation data (position, veloc-
ity, attitude and altitude) are needed for guidance and
control of UAVs;
2) navigation and path-planning algorithms must be com-
putationally efﬁcient as the ﬂight environments could
be constantly changing;
Currently, video cameras become a standard sensor for
UAVs for their reduced sizes and costs but increased per-
formance. And vision-based approaches to enhancing UAV
navigation and path planning are attracting increasing re-
search interests. The images taken by onboard-cameras can
provide a large amount of information which can be utilized
to solve navigation and path planning related problems. Since
GPS, IMU, barometer and onboard-cameras have different
measurement strengths and limits, they can complement each
other in different situations and provide accurate and real-
time navigation data for UAVs.
In this paper, we propose a framework of real-time UAV
based autonomous navigation and path planning. Compared
with most navigation and path planning methods described
above, we develop a more complete and robust system with
both semantic geo-registered cloud points database, neural
network based object database, and address the mentioned
challenges accordingly.
The contributions of this paper include
1) Design an autonomous navigation and path planing
system for UAVs;
2) Combine geo-registered 3D point clouds database and
2D digital maps for vision-based UAVs navigation;
3) Fusion of vision-based navigation information with
proprioceptive sensors (IMU, odometry and barometer)
to provide accurate and reliable navigation data for
UAVs;
4) Utilize a neural network based object detection method
to realize dynamic obstacles avoidance for UAVs;
5) Utilize semantic cloud points to realize static obstacles
avoidance for UAVs;
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces
the related work on vision-based UAV navigation and path
planning. Section III describes the whole system architecture
and states problems. Section IV presents the integrated
650
2017 IEEE International Conference on Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Systems (MFI 2017)
November 16 - 18, 2017, Daegu, Korea
978-1-5090-6064-1/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 02:41:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
navigation and path planing system framework, including
georegistration of point clouds using geographic data, reg-
istration of point clouds captured by on-board camera to
geo-registered 3D point clouds database, neural network
based obstacles avoidance and semantic point clouds based
obstacles avoidance, and fusion of vision-based navigation
information with proprioceptive sensors. Section V provides
the results and discussions. Section VI concludes the paper
and outlines future work.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Vision-based UAV Navigation
Outdoor UAV navigation usually involves obstacles-
avoidance, landmark detection, map building and updating,
and attitude estimation. And vision-based navigation technol-
ogy plays an important role in UAV outdoor navigation. It is
typically approached by matching the aerial image sequence
with geo-registered image database [7]. Researchers have de-
veloped several vision-based methods to provide information
for UAV navigation. These methods are mainly categorized
into scene matching based, Kalman ﬁlter based [8], simul-
taneous localization and mapping(SLAM) based [8], 3D
point cloud registration based method. For scene matching
based navigation method, natural landmarks [9] or man-
made markers [10], [11] are utilized to improve scene
matching efﬁciency and accuracy. However, the performance
of these methods were greatly depend on number, features
and distribution of landmarks.
An relatively early work on Kalman ﬁlter based vision-
based UAV technique is [12]. In this estimator, the position
information is obtained from an extended Kalman ﬁlter,
with the UAVs position and velocity as its states and the
inter-frame displacement measurements as observation data.
However, the estimator did not provide experimental and
simulation results. Another Kalman ﬁlter based technique
was propsed in [13], [14] that does take rotation into consid-
eration. It estimates the airplanes position by estimating its
translation and rotation using optical ﬂow and other sensory
data (e.g., altitude information). Sometimes it combines the
vision odometry information and IMU measurements to es-
timate UAV’s position and attitude[15], [16]. The difﬁculties
of the methods using fusion information of stereo vision and
IMU were easily interfered by complicated environment and
easily lead to drifting errors. Numerous research works were
carried out to apply the SLAM technique to UAV[17], [18].
SLAM which was originally developed for estimating
ground robot’s position and a set of landmarks’ position,
it has been adopted to vision-based UAV navigation. For
instance, the approach in [19] requires man-made ground
landmarks with known sizes and that in [20] requires the
known 3D coordinates of some ground landmarks. In some
applications, landmarks cannot be planted ahead of time,
not to mention speciﬁc information of landmarks. Therefore,
SLAM is still a challenge when applied to large areas.
Continuous generation of a 3D point cloud for underground
vehicle navigation in dynamic and unknown environments
were described in [21], [22] etc. However, this method has
the limitations of the rapid and cost effective capturing of
3D data from larger outdoor environment.
B. Path Planning for UAV
In recent years, there are many methods that produce either
2-D, or 3D trajectories for guiding UAV in different kinds
of environments, such artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld (APF) method,
genetic algorithm and A* algorithm [23], [24], [25], [26].
Due to its advantages of simple algorithm structure, the con-
cise mathematical description and the convenience for real-
time control, the APF method is commonly used as a path
planning and obstacle avoidance candidate technique [27].
Furthermore, it also can be utilized to solve the collision
avoidance problem of the multi-UAV system by changing
the source of the artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld.
Based on the APF, a solution for collision and obsta-
cle free formation ﬂight and reconﬁguration of groups of
autonomous helicopters was presented [28]. Similarly, the
APF method is applied to solve the problem of collision
and terrain avoidance formultiple UAVs, tracking a low-
altitude trajectory [29]. The genetic algorithms have also
been used for solving the UAV path-ﬁnding problem in
3D environment. Although these optimization methods can
effectively solve the problem of path planning, they have
existed premature convergence phenomenon. Therefore, the
local minimum problem is APF’s biggest problem.
For A* algorithm, it calculates the cost of the current
nodes to reach other nodes and uses the heuristic information
to evaluate the node, based on that then choosing the lowest
total cost node as its expanded node and ﬁnally get the
optimal path [30]. A* algorithm is commonly used in the
engineering algorithm; not only has it a higher searching
efﬁciency, but also guarantees the optimal path. Therefore,
in this paper, A* algorithm is utilized to plan path for UAV
navigation.
III. SYSTEM SETUP
A. System Diagram
Onboard sensors
GPS
Camera
IMU
Gyroscopes
Accelerometers
local point cloud
attitude
acceleration
Altimeter
position
altitude
Geo-register point 
clouds matching 
Filter
position
Path Planning
Ground Control Work Station
States control
2D map
Local obstacles 
avoidance
Geo-register Point 
Clouds Map 
UAV states
Fig. 1.
System diagram.
Fig. 1 shows our system diagram. Our system includes ﬁve
components: 1) onboard sensors module, 2) data processing
module, 3) system control module, 4) path planing module,
651
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 02:41:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
5) ground control work station. The state vector of UAV
includes real-time imaging, altitude, azimuth and coordinates
of the world.
These state vectors can be obtained from the onboard sen-
sors which contain camera(s), GPS, IMU, and altimeter. And
gyroscopes and accelerometers comprise the IMU sensors.
We use the images from on-board camera to reconstruct 3D
point clouds and register the GPS coordinates into the 3D
point clouds. During the procedure of UAV ﬂight, there are
many noises to have an effect on the data obtained from these
onboard sensors. The other component of data processing
module is a ﬁlter to make sure the data without noises
pollution.
The control module includes states control with 2D map,
local obstacles avoidance with geo-register point clouds map.
The function of this module is to realize the navigation, lo-
calization and obstacles avoidance. The path planing module
is used for ﬁnd the most optimized path for ﬂying when the
UAV is in the auto-pilot mode.
The ground control work station is integrated with the GIS
database to determine the global coordinates of the target and
provide the target trajectory prediction using geographical
information such as the high building. And the user can
interact with the UAV through the ground command center
such as select the target from the video monitor or change
the UAV ﬂight course.
B. Dynamic model and Algorithm overview
When GPS is lost, the calibrated IMU data and baro-
altimeter data is utilized to provide UAV states. For
INS/baro-altimeter data asscoiation system with discrete ob-
servations, we should provide a dynamic model to suppress
the errors drifting with time. At time k, the estimated UAV
state vector is as the following:
xw
k = (vw, gw, hw, aw
v ) ,
(1)
where xw
k is an estimated vector of the time k; vw represents
the velocity of the UAV; gw represents the gyroscopes of
UAV; hw represents the height vector of UAV; aw
v represents
the acceleration of IMU mounted on UAV. The overall pro-
cedure of our integrated UAV navigation system is presented
in table I.
IV. NAVIGATION AND PATH PLANNING
A. Integrated GPS/Vision-based Navigation System
Depending on the availability of GPS information, the
integrated navigation system works with two models. When
GPS measurements are available, a sixteen-state Kalman
ﬁlter estimates the errors of a strap down calculation which
are corrected subsequently, assuring hereby the long-term
accuracy of the navigation solution. The state vector of
this ﬁlter comprises three errors in position, three errors in
velocity, three attitude errors, six errors of the inertial sensor
bias estimates, as well as the error of the baro-altimeter
bias estimate. Additionally, the accelerometer and gyroscope
biases are estimated and corrected to improve the accuracy
of UAV states.
TABLE I
VISUAL OBJECT TRACKING ALGORITHM
Algorithm 1 Integrated UAV Navigation Algorithm
Input: GPS signal Ti(i = 0, 1, 2, ...)
Output: GPS signal T c
i (i = 0, 1, 2, ...), GPS signal set T
1:
repeat
2:
Get SNR of the current GPS snr;
3:
if (30 ≤snr ≤50) then
4:
T c
i = T i;
5:
Periodically Update and correct the signal of IMU, altimeter;
6:
else
7:
Get the altitude (h), velocity (v), orientation information d;
8:
EKF ←{h,v,d} and get GPS T c
i ;
9:
end
10:
T ←T i
11:
Update model T ;
12:
Obstacle avoidence;
13:
until end of ﬂight
When GPS is lost, the vision-based navigation model is
selected. The positions of UAV are calculated by registering
the local point cloud or aerial images to hybrid database. Af-
ter an appropriate initialization of the state and the covariance
matrix using data provided by the sixteen-state Kalman ﬁlter,
the calibrated IMU data and baro-altimeter data is utilized
to provide UAV states.
 X(k) = ∅k,k−1X(k −1) + BkUk + ΓkW(k)
Z(k) = CkX(k) + ν(k)
(2)
where X(k) is an estimated vector of the time k; ∅k,k−1 is
the state transition matrix from time k−1 to time k; x(k−1)
is an vector of the time k −1; Γk is the system noise matrix
corresponding to the system noise w(k) in the time k; Bk
is the control-input matrix which is applied to the control
vector Uk; Z(k) is an observation (or measurement) of the
true state X(k) at time k; Ck is the observation matrix which
maps the true state space into the observed space and ν(k)
is the observation noise.
We don’t make sure that the GPS module is always in
work. There are many factors including being in tunnel
or forest that can reduce the positioning accuracy of GPS
module. When the entropy of GPS module is higher than
the threshold, the state vector X(k) includes the information
of GPS, IMU and baro-altimeter. When the entropy of GPS
module is lower than that of the threshold, the information
obtained based vision will replace the position of the GPS
module.
B. Visual Inertial Odometry
To improve the precision of the vision-based navigation
in GPS-denied areas, we utilize visual inertial odometry
with ﬁlter-based to realize navigation and localization. We
add both aerial image features and IMU data into the state
vector at the time k. The state vector at time k includes the
pose of UAV, scale factor, current attitude errors, gyroscope
biases and a group of image features. The brute force feature
matching computation cost of these features are O(M 2), and
M is the dimension of these features. It will reduce the
performance of real-time navigation to use all of features of
652
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 02:41:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
the current aerial image. Then we just only extract the ﬁxed
ratio of total number of features to improve the performance
of real-time navigation.
In this section, we utilize the BRISK [31] algorithm to
extract the aerial image features. To realize the registration
between current frame and its last key frames, we utilize the
Brute-force descriptor matcher. Then we can construct the
reprojection error of these frames with bundle adjustment
to ﬁnd the mapping relationship between 2D and 3D. With
these prior knowledge and state vector of previous frame, we
can use the EKF to estimate the current state vectors. There
is error term of IMU which represents the difference between
estimated state vector and parametric variable. Combine
these two error vectors, we can derive the following cost
function:
J (x) := ΣI
i=1ΣK
k=1Σj∈J (i,k)ei,j,k
r
T W i,j,k
r
ei,j,k
r
+ΣK−1
i=1 ek
s
T W k
s ek
s;
(3)
where i is the ith framel k is the index of the ith frame of
camera; j is the index of image features; W i,j,k
r
represents
the information matrix; W k
s represents the error of informa-
tion matrix.
The 3D point clouds which are reconstructed with our aeri-
al images are registered with global-position-system(GPS)
coordinates. We can utilize the geo-registered 3D point
clouds to rectify the errors of IMU and reprojection.
C. Semantized point clouds for UAV Scene Understanding
Point cloud is an important type of geometric data struc-
ture. Compared to 2D image, 3D point cloud could provide
more geometric information for UAV to better percept and
understand the surrounding environment. Fig. 2 illustrates the
construction procedure of constructed 3D semantized point
clouds. As shown in the Fig. 2, we registered 3D point clouds
with the GPS coordinates corresponding to the known 2D
map, like Google Map, or Bing map etc..
As we all known, the 2D map always contain the property
of objects. Then we can utilize the known geometry infor-
mation of 2D map to label the most of objects in the 3D
point clouds. It can reduce the computation cost of semantic
segmentation and labeling by means of geo-registered 3D
point clouds and 2D map. We use the state-of-art object
detection neural network [32]to detect these objects which
are used for the prior knowledge for the condition-random-
ﬁeld (CRF) algorithm to accurately segment these unlabeled
objects for semantic labelling.
Now we can construct the octree map to encode the
property of each voxel. Using octree map has merits [33]
on 1) supporting multi-resolution map queries; 2) storing
occupancy probability in nodes; 3) compacting in memory
and on disk and efﬁcient access and queries; 4) ﬂexible
extension of mapped area; 5) lossless compression. The
octree map can help UAV to cognitive its complex surround-
ings. Especially when UAV encounter some obstacles, like
building, power lines and tress, in the denied GIS area, the
UAV can efﬁciently avoid the collision with obstacles.
As to to automatically recognize object during the process
of operating ﬂight and prepare for the keeping UAV away
from obstacles, we extract image features and achieve the
classiﬁcation through CNNs.
Feature Points Detection
Corresponding Feature Points Analysis 
Aerial images sequence
Feature points
Robust Estimation
correspondences
3D scene reconstruction and camera 
parameters
SfM
Dense and Mesh
Octree
Structured
point clouds
GPS Registration
Ground Control Points Registration
Segmentation based on hierarchical 
clustering 
Semantic Labeling
3D back projection
Semantic Segmentation network 
Semantized point clouds
Fig. 2.
(left) The aerial images sequences captured by on-board camera
are applied to generate point clouds of surrounding environment with using
GlobalACSfM[34] algorithm. Octree Algorithm is applied to structuralize
3D point clouds to improve data access and queries efﬁciency; (right)
Semantic3D.net algorithm[35] is utilized to semantic segmentation point
clouds. Ground control point registration[36] is performed to restore the
semantized point clouds scene to known 3D coordinates. Geodesy data(i.e
GPS or XYZ prior) is registered to SfM camera center positions to limit
the number of pair by matching only neighbour images so that speed up
the pairwise features matching.
V. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
Fig. 3 shows the experimental setup. The sensors onboard
the quadrotor UAV includes differential GPS (DGPS), IMU,
CCD camera with large view ﬁeld, altimeter. The sensor
locations are showed in Fig. 3. Integrated aerial zoom camera
based on DJIs class leading Zenmuse X3 was installed on
the UAV, its large focal length range from 22mm to 77mm
makes it ideal for aerial photography. The sensors’ related
Fig. 3.
Experiment setup
parameters are listed in Table II.
Fig. 4(a) shows some different illustrations of our 3D cam-
pus. These point clouds are reconstructed with aerial images
by camera mounted on the UAV. Fig. 4(b) shows Octree
map which is a hierarchical tree data structure from point
cloud data (Fig. 4(a)). We utilize the jet color to illustrate
different altitude of 3D points of our 3D campus. The Octree
653
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 02:41:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 4.
Illustrations of 3D point clouds.(a) Image-based point clouds; (b) Octree map generated from (a), showing occupied voxels only; (c) Semantic
segmentation of (a).
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS FOR SENSORS OF INTEGRATED
NAVIGATION SYSTEM
Sensors
Accuracy
Parameters
Max
Rate
DGPS
Horizontal:
±(8mm+1ppm)
Vertical:
±(15mm+1ppm)
N, E, Alt(m);
Vxy, Vz(m/s)
50Hz
IMU
Gyro scale: <2%
Gyro bias(deg/hr): 20
Acce scale:<1%
p q r(deg/s)
ax ay az
50Hz
Altim
detect range: 40m
accuracy 0.02m
height
is a hierarchical data structure for spatial subdivision in 3D
space. Accordingly, we can set different resolution of Octree
to adjust the size of 3D point clouds model correspondingly.
The resolution of Octree is an termination condition to decide
whether the cubic volume is the recursively subdivided into
eight sub-volumes. There are many small cubic in Fig.4(b).
Each small cubic represents an node in a Octree, usually
called a voxel. The Octree can improve the efﬁciency of
Computation and storage. Fig. 4(c) shows an semantic label-
ing of 3D point clouds. An semantic labeling of 3D point
clouds can help a robot, unmanned vehicle(UV) and UAV
to understand the nature of its surroundings. As we can see
from Fig. 4(c), the structured object model, like buildings
and roads, can be easily segmented from the point clouds.
On the other hand, these unstructured objects model, like
grass and river, cannot be accurately segmented from the
our 3D campus model. Due the ﬂight of UAV in the open
air, these unstructured objects models don’t have an effect
on the ﬂight of UAV.
Fig. 5 shows an example trajectory generated by our UAV
with A* algorithm. The curve (red) is trajectory of UAV with
A-star path planning. The length of ﬂight trajectory of UAV
is about 250m. The triangle (red) and circle (blue) are the
start point and destination point of our UAV respectively.
In this experiment, the GPS signal is removed to verify
our integrated navigation system, and recorded to verify the
accuracy of our integrated navigation system. Accordingly,
we always maintain the drones ﬂying at an altitude below
40 meters to verify the performance of obstacle avoidance.
So we can ﬁnd the UAV across under the ﬂy-over between
two buildings, the height being about 15 meters.
Fig. 6 shows a comparison from GPS receivers with our
integrated UAV navigation system. Fig. 6(b) shows the GPS
Fig. 5.
Example of trajectory generated by our UAV. Our 3D campus
model is shown with point clouds; The curve (red) is trajectory of UAV
with A∗path planning; the triangle is the start point of UAV and the square
is the destination point of UAV.
error in the X direction. Fig. 6(c) shows the GPS error in the
Y direction. We can ﬁnd the error range in the X direction
is [−4, 4] meters, and in the Y direction is [−6, 6] meters.
The range of error is allowable and achieve the general
civilian GPS positioning capabilities. The error come from
two aspects: 1)accumulation error of IMU and drifting with
time, 2) inaccurate vision-based navigation.
0
100
200
X(unit:m)
-200
-150
-100
-50
Y(unit:m)
Flying path
Ground truth
Start point
Destination point
(a)
-200 -150 -100 -50
Y(unit:m)
-4
-2
0
2
4
X-Error(unit:m)
(b)
0
100
200
X(unit:m)
-5
0
5
Y-Error(unit:m)
(c)
Fig. 6.
Overview of GPS signal. (a) GPS comparison between estimated
and ground truth; (b) Error in the X direction; (c) Error in the Y direction
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We presented an integrated UAV navigation system for
ﬂight path planning during the UAV in GPS-denied area.
This system is a coarse-to-ﬁne navigation system. During
the coarse phase, this integrated system is based on GEO-
registered 3D point clouds and 2D map for vision-based UAV
navigation. Fusion of vision-based navigation information
with proprioceptive sensors (IMU, odometry and barometer)
is to provide accurate and reliable navigation data for UAVs.
The deep neural network and semantic point clouds provide
654
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 02:41:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
reliable advice for path planning and obstacle avoidance. The
Integrated UAV Navigation System Based on Geo-registered
3D Points Cloud performs competitively with respect to the
state-of-the-art methods in terms of localization accuracy and
navigation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the Science
and Innovation Committee of Shenzhen City (No. CK-
FW20160414153721743 and No. JCYJ2015063014532230).
REFERENCES
[1] S. Islam, P. X. Liu, and A. El Saddik, “Robust control of four-
rotor unmanned aerial vehicle with disturbance uncertainty,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 1563–1571,
2015.
[2] T. Xiang, F. Jiang, G. Lan, J. Sun, G. Liu, Q. Hao, and C. Wang,
“Uav based target tracking and recognition,” in Multisensor Fusion
and Integration for Intelligent Systems (MFI), 2016 IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 400–405.
[3] S. Rady, A. Kandil, and E. Badreddin, “A hybrid localization approach
for uav in gps denied areas,” in System Integration (SII), 2011
IEEE/SICE International Symposium on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1269–
1274.
[4] G. Conte and P. Doherty, “An integrated uav navigation system based
on aerial image matching,” in Aerospace Conference, 2008 IEEE.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–10.
[5] H. Duan and P. Li, “Uav path planning,” in Bio-inspired Computation
in Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.
Springer, 2014, pp. 99–142.
[6] Y.-b. Chen, G.-c. Luo, Y.-s. Mei, J.-q. Yu, and X.-l. Su, “Uav path
planning using artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method updated by optimal
control theory,” International Journal of Systems Science, vol. 47,
no. 6, pp. 1407–1420, 2016.
[7] G. N. DeSouza and A. C. Kak, “Vision for mobile robot navigation:
A survey,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intel-
ligence, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 237–267, 2002.
[8] J. Zhang, W. Liu, and Y. Wu, “Novel technique for vision-based uav
navigation,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,
vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 2731–2741, 2011.
[9] A. Cesetti, E. Frontoni, A. Mancini, P. Zingaretti, and S. Longhi,
“A vision-based guidance system for uav navigation and safe landing
using natural landmarks,” Journal of intelligent and robotic systems,
vol. 57, no. 1-4, p. 233, 2010.
[10] S. Huh and D. H. Shim, “A vision-based automatic landing method for
ﬁxed-wing uavs,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, vol. 57,
no. 1, pp. 217–231, 2010.
[11] D. B. Barber, T. W. McLain, and B. Edwards, “Vision-based landing of
ﬁxed-wing miniature air vehicles.” JACIC, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 207–226,
2009.
[12] Y. Bresler and S. J. Merhav, “On-line vehicle motion estimation
from visual terrain information part ii: Ground velocity and position
estimation,” IEEE transactions on aerospace and electronic systems,
no. 5, pp. 588–604, 1986.
[13] M. C. Bosse, “A vision augmented navigation system for an au-
tonomous helicopter,” Master’s thesis, Boston University, 1997.
[14] M. Bosse, W. Karl, D. Castanon, and P. DeBitetto, “A vision aug-
mented navigation system,” in Intelligent Transportation System, 1997.
ITSC’97., IEEE Conference on.
IEEE, 1997, pp. 1028–1033.
[15] J. Kelly, S. Saripalli, and G. Sukhatme, “Combined visual and inertial
navigation for an unmanned aerial vehicle,” in Field and Service
Robotics.
Springer, 2008, pp. 255–264.
[16] L. R. G. Carrillo, A. E. D. L´opez, R. Lozano, and C. P´egard,
“Combining stereo vision and inertial navigation system for a quad-
rotor uav,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, vol. 65, no. 1-4,
pp. 373–387, 2012.
[17] J. Wang, M. Garratt, A. Lambert, J. J. Wang, S. Han, and D. Sinclair,
“Integration of gps/ins/vision sensors to navigate unmanned aerial
vehicles,” The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, vol. 37, pp. 963–970, 2008.
[18] J. Kim and S. Sukkarieh, “6dof slam aided gnss/ins navigation in gnss
denied and unknown environments,” Positioning, vol. 1, no. 09, p. 0,
2005.
[19] ——, “Autonomous airborne navigation in unknown terrain environ-
ments,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,
vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 1031–1045, 2004.
[20] Z. Chen and J. Samarabandu, “Using multiple view geometry within
extended kalman ﬁlter framework for simultaneous localization and
map-building,” in Mechatronics and Automation, 2005 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference, vol. 2.
IEEE, 2005, pp. 695–700.
[21] M. Whitty, S. Cossell, K. S. Dang, J. Guivant, and J. Katupitiya,
“Autonomous navigation using a real-time 3d point cloud,” in 2010
Australasian Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2010, pp. 1–3.
[22] N. Haala, M. Peter, J. Kremer, and G. Hunter, “Mobile lidar mapping
for 3d point cloud collection in urban areasła performance test,” The
international archives of the photogrammetry, remote sensing and
spatial information sciences, vol. 37, pp. 1119–1127, 2008.
[23] C. Hocaoglu and A. C. Sanderson, “Planning multiple paths with evo-
lutionary speciation,” IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation,
vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 169–191, 2001.
[24] Y. Chen, X. Zhao, and J. Han, “Review of 3 d path planning methods
for mobile robot,” Jiqiren(Robot), vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 568–576, 2010.
[25] S. Scherer, S. Singh, L. Chamberlain, and M. Elgersma, “Flying
fast and low among obstacles: Methodology and experiments,” The
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 549–
574, 2008.
[26] Y. Li, H. Chen, M. J. Er, and X. Wang, “Coverage path planning
for uavs based on enhanced exact cellular decomposition method,”
Mechatronics, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 876–885, 2011.
[27] A. Berry, J. Howitt, D.-W. Gu, and I. Postlethwaite, “Enabling
the operation of multiple micro-air-vehicles in increasingly complex
obstacle-rich environments,” in AIAA Infotech@ Aerospace Confer-
ence, 2010.
[28] T. Paul, T. R. Krogstad, and J. T. Gravdahl, “Modelling of uav for-
mation ﬂight using 3d potential ﬁeld,” Simulation Modelling Practice
and Theory, vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 1453–1462, 2008.
[29] E. Oland and R. Kristiansen, “Collision and terrain avoidance for
uavs using the potential ﬁeld method,” in Aerospace Conference, 2013
IEEE.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–7.
[30] L. Blasi, S. Barbato, and M. Mattei, “A particle swarm approach
for ﬂight path optimization in a constrained environment,” Aerospace
science and technology, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 128–137, 2013.
[31] S. Leutenegger, M. Chli, and R. Y. Siegwart, “Brisk: Binary robust
invariant scalable keypoints,” vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 2548–2555, 2011.
[32] W. Ouyang, X. Zeng, X. Wang, S. Qiu, P. Luo, Y. Tian, H. Li, S. Yang,
Z. Wang, and H. Li, “Deepid-net: Deformable deep convolutional
neural networks for object detection,” vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2016.
[33] A. Hornung, K. M. Wurm, M. Bennewitz, C. Stachniss, and W. Bur-
gard, “Octomap: An efﬁcient probabilistic 3d mapping framework
based on octrees,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 189–206,
2013.
[34] P. Moulon, P. Monasse, and R. Marlet, “Global fusion of relative
motions for robust, accurate and scalable structure from motion,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2013, pp. 3248–3255.
[35] T. Hackel, N. Savinov, L. Ladicky, J. D. Wegner, K. Schindler,
and M. Pollefeys, “Semantic3d. net: A new large-scale point cloud
classiﬁcation benchmark,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03847, 2017.
[36] P.
Moulon,
P.
Monasse,
R.
Marlet,
and
Others,
“Open-
mvg.
an
open
multiple
view
geometry
library.”
http-
s://github.com/openMVG/openMVG.
655
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 18,2026 at 02:41:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
