warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1001.pdf
sha256: B9A47311C55FC98400BD8756A55EA701BB2B3EAD317C5CC7565DA9EA5F05A4B4
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 39
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Perception and Navigation for an Autonomous
Quadrotor in GPS-denied Environments
S. Saeedi, A. Nagaty, C. Thibault, M. Trentini, and H. Li
Abstract
Robots need autonomous navigation to complete their tasks efﬁciently. This
becomes more challenging in GPS-denied environments where positioning infor-
mation is not available. For small ﬂying robots and quadrotors, inherent limitations
such as limited sensor payload and small system time-constant add another layer
of challenge to the problem.
This paper presents a solution for autonomous navigation of a quadrotor rotor-
craft by performing autonomous behaviors, such as exploration, returning home,
or following waypoints. The solution relies on accurate localization, mapping, and
navigation between waypoints. Multiple tests were performed in simulated and
real-world environments to show the effectiveness of the proposed solution.
1
Introduction
In robotics, perceiving the environment and representing the acquired knowledge has
always been a challenging problem. By increasing robot complexity and degrees of
freedom, the environment perception problem becomes more complicated. Map learn-
ing is a solution for this problem which involves localization, mapping, and path plan-
ning. For a mobile robot, map learning is an essential requirement by which the robot
understands its unknown environment and attempts to perform autonomous tasks. The
developed map and robot trajectory represent all the knowledge that the robot has per-
ceived using its sensors. The acquired knowledge through the map learning process
can be utilized to perform various autonomous behaviors, such as exploring the envi-
ronment, localizing targets, and following waypoints.
In recent years, researchers have intensively worked on the development of ﬂying
machines capable of performing complicated missions with little human supervision.
These vehicles are commonly known as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). UAVs have
no crew onboard and are ﬂown either remotely by a pilot at a ground control station
or autonomously through a pre-planned program. Rotorcraft, vehicles with multiple
rotors, have attracted more attention recently, with quadrotors being the most popular.
Multiple-rotor vehicles, also known as ﬂying robots, have outstanding maneuverability.
Furthermore, they are less complex compared with other rotorcraft such as helicopters.
The previously mentioned advantages have made quadrotors more suitable for civil and
military applications.
With the main objective of developing efﬁcient quadrotors, capable of accomplish-
ing complicated tasks autonomously, a signiﬁcant amount of work has been dedicated
1
[p.2]
to designing and building efﬁcient sensing suites to perceive the environment and esti-
mate the state of the vehicle. Knowledge of the surrounding world and variables repre-
senting the vehicle in the world are used for vehicle stabilization. Once the vehicle is
stable, it can perform more difﬁcult and complicated tasks autonomously.
Early prototypes of UAVs were dependent on inertial dead reckoning aided by
global positioning system (GPS). However, GPS signals have poor performance in
urban settings and inclement weather conditions. Moreover, there is no GPS reception
in most indoor environments and enclosed spaces which are referred to as GPS-denied
environments. To obtain position and orientation estimates in these environments, an
alternative solution is to equip vehicles with inertial, optical, and ranging sensors.
This paper studies the possibility of using state-of-the-art sensing technologies to
perform perception in GPS-denied environments and achieve autonomy with minimum
human intervention. The rest of the work is organized as follows: Section 2 presents
background information to quadrotor and autonomous navigation requirements. Sec-
tion 3 introduces the proposed solution for perception and navigation of an autonomous
quadrotor. Section 4 presents experimental results in simulated and real-world environ-
ments. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the work.
1.1
Contribution
The contribution of this work is an integrated autonomy solution, which includes all
necessary elements for quadrotor autonomy. These elements include mission planning,
map learning, and state estimation. Furthermore, map learning consists of localiza-
tion, mapping, and path planning components. The selected sensor suite enables the
quadrotor to operate in GPS-denied environment. The proposed solution with the sen-
sor suite can also be used on ground robots or other types of rotorcraft in GPS-denied
environments. The contributions are summarized as follows:
• At the mission level, a set of behaviors are developed and structured to suit the
goals of autonomous navigation.
• Main building blocks of the autonomy solution are implemented to ensure that
the mission goals are met.
• Localization and mapping are performed using mounted sensors considering 3D
motion of the robot.
• To guide the robot between waypoints, a path planning algorithm is developed.
• The robot has been enabled to explore and map unknown environments using the
path planning, localization, and mapping capabilities.
• The proposed work is designed in such a way that it can be utilized on ground
robots as well.
2
[p.3]
2
Background and Literature Review
This section presents the background for rotorcraft perception. First, some information
about small unmanned ﬂying robots, more speciﬁcally quadrotors, is presented. Then,
background to navigation which includes control, state estimation, path planning, lo-
calization, mapping, and high level mission planning is presented.
2.1
Quadrotor
A quadrotor, also called quad rotorcraft, is a rotorcraft that is lifted, controlled, and
propelled by four rotors. The quadrotor can take off and land vertically. It can ﬂy in
any direction without changing its heading. This section presents background to its
history, motivation, deﬁnition, advantages, and disadvantages.
With the advances in electromechanical systems and sensing technologies, recently
quadrotors have become popular in unmanned systems research. Their small size and
maneuverability make it possible to ﬂy indoors and outdoors. Compared with other
rotorcraft, quadrotors are less complicated and easier to control. They have many dif-
ferent applications, including border patrol, search and rescue [1], pipeline monitoring,
wildﬁre monitoring, trafﬁc monitoring, land surveys, and agile load transportation [2].
Small-sized quadrotors have signiﬁcant advantages as unmanned systems. Com-
pared with ground robots, they can move in any direction and therefore are not limited
by obstacles. Compared to other rotorcraft, such as helicopters, quadrotors have less
complex dynamics; however, for small-size autonomous ﬂying robots, there exists a
number of challenges. These challenges impose limitations on ﬂight time, autonomy,
and maneuverability of the rotorcraft and include the following:
• Nonlinearity: Quadrotor models have nonlinear kinematics and dynamics. These
models are used for control, stabilization, and state estimation purposes. Most
techniques of control or state estimation require linearization of the system model.
Linearization is an approximation and can affect the performance of the con-
troller.
• Fast Dynamics: The small time-constant of the quadrotor, which is because of
fast dynamics, requires a robust and reliable controller.
• Limited Payload: Due to limited payload, limited number of sensors can be
carried onboard. Moreover, lightweight batteries must be used which limit the
ﬂight time.
• Vibration: Vibration caused by high speed rotors affects the onboard sensor
measurements. To minimize the vibration effects, efﬁcient noise removal ﬁlter-
ing and vibration damping must be used.
Fig. 1 shows a simpliﬁed sketch of the quadrotor, its coordinate systems, and the
free body diagram. The frame tagged with X −Y −Z shows the body frame. The
frame tagged with N −E −D shows the inertial frame, based on the North-East-Down
standard. Fi and Mi (i=1,..4) are the aerodynamic forces and moments produced by
the ith rotor, respectively. L is the moment arm, the distance from the center of the
3
[p.4]
r
L
L
L
L
X
Y
Z
mg
N
E
D
F1
F2
F3
F4
M1
M2
M3
M4
Figure 1: The coordinate systems and the free body diagram of the quadrotor with
acting forces. The frame shown by X −Y −Z is the body frame. The frame shown
by N −E −D is the inertial frame, following the North-East-Down standard.
quadrotor to the axis of rotation of the rotors. g is the acceleration due to gravity
and m is the mass of the quadrotor. The pose of the robot in this work includes the
3D coordinates of the system and the orientation of the system. The kinematic and
dynamic models of the quadrotor using these parameters are explained in [3].
2.2
Quadrotor Navigation
The main problem for an autonomous ﬂying robot is reaching a desired location with-
out human supervision and intervention. In the literature and the robotics community,
this problem is referred to as navigation or guidance. In this section, quadrotor navi-
gation is investigated.
To address the navigation problem, a set of tasks must be addressed. These tasks
include the following:
• Mission planning,
• Map learning: simultaneous planning, localization, and mapping,
• State estimation, and
• Control.
Fig. 2 depicts these tasks and their dependency on each other. Each task in each
level operates based on the information received from the next higher level. Mission
planning determines the general behavior of the robot. For example, a mission planning
algorithm may decide that the robot will explore an unknown environment, then it will
4
[p.5]
Mission Planning
Map Learning
State Estimation
Control
(mapping, localization, path planning)
Figure 2: Navigation stack. This ﬁgure shows the required tasks to accomplish naviga-
tion. Each level relies on information received from the next higher level.
return to the start position and will deliver an exploration report such as a map. Map
learning is the task of modeling the world, which requires mapping, localization, and
planning a path between waypoints. State estimation is the process of fusing data from
all available sources. For instance, using an optical sensor, a robot can estimate 2D pose
and heading through localization and mapping. The 2D pose and the heading can be
fused by odometry or inertial measurements to provide better estimates. The estimated
state is used by the Control layer to generate proper control signals to stabilize the robot
towards a desired state. In the rest of this section, each of these problems in the context
of the quadrotor is brieﬂy introduced.
2.2.1
Control
Compared to other types of rotorcraft, quadrotors are mechanically simpler and easier
to control. However, controlling a quadrotor is still a challenging problem due to its
system nonlinearities, cross couplings of the gyroscopic moments and underactuation
[3], [4]. Additionally, controlling and coordinating a ﬂeet of rotorcraft requires dealing
with another layer of problems which are inherent to the multi-agent systems [5]. For
more information on controlling a quadrotor, see [6], [7], [8], and [9].
2.2.2
State Estimation
Any control algorithm needs to have access to the real state of the system. The state of
a system is a set of variables which describe enough about the system so that one can
determine and analyze its future behavior. In practical applications, state variables are
affected by noise and might not be observable directly. To solve these problems, state
estimation techniques are used. Accurate state estimation directly affects the perfor-
mance of the controller and therefore the overall performance of the system. Typically,
the state of a quadrotor includes its orientation, position, and velocities.
5
[p.6]
In 2006, S. Thrun et al. [10] were among the ﬁrst researchers who did real-time
state estimation. They performed state estimation with a helicopter in an outdoor en-
vironment. In 2009, Grzonka et al. [11] from the University of Freiburg and Bachrach
et al. [12] from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) performed state estima-
tion for a quadrotor, independently. MIT’s work won the 2009 International Aerial
Robotics Competition (IARC) held by the Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems
International (AUVSI). Since then, researchers have investigated different conﬁgura-
tions for state estimation, but one thing which is common in all solutions is the use of
Kalman ﬁltering. Kalman ﬁltering, if tuned properly, can provide optimal results for
linear systems.
2.2.3
Map Learning
Deploying an autonomous robot in a real-world scenario requires learning maps. Learn-
ing maps is different than only mapping. In mapping it is assumed that the pose of the
mapper is known, but in learning maps, generally, pose is not known. To learn maps, a
number of key problems should be addressed, including
• Mapping,
• Localization, and
• Path planning.
Fig. 3 depicts these key problems and their relationships. Mapping is the process of
modeling a robot’s world given sensory measurements, while localization calculates
the position of the robot within the map. To move between two given points in the
world, a path planning or motion planning algorithm is required.
There is a tight dependency between these components. In an unknown environ-
ment, mapping and localization can not be decoupled. This is because to make a map,
the robot needs to know its current position and to know its current position, it needs
to have a map. Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) addresses this issue
for one robot [13] or a team of robots [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], and [21].
In cases where the map is known in advance, active localization algorithms are used
to improve the pose of the robot by selecting control actions that will reduce the un-
certainty of the robot’s pose estimate. If the pose of the robot is known, exploration
algorithms are used to ﬁnd waypoints which lead the robot to the unexplored parts of
the environment. The combination of mapping, localization, and path planning is often
referred to as simultaneous planning, localization, and mapping (SPLAM); integrated
autonomy solutions; or autonomy packages [22]. Complete information on different
methods for components of map learning in relation to mapping and localization can be
found in [23], [24], and [25], and for path planning in [26] and [27]. SLAM and path
planning for indoor quadrotors were ﬁrst performed in 2009 by Grzonka et al. [11]
from the University of Freiburg and Bachrach et al. [12] from MIT, independently.
Later, other researchers continued the same trend to improve on the previous results.
In 2010, Dryanovski et al. [28] at the City College of New York presented their ap-
proach for quadrotor SLAM. It was similar to the work proposed by Grzonka et al.
6
[p.7]
SPLAM
SLAM
active
localization
localization
exploration
mapping
path planning
Figure 3: Tasks that need to be accomplished towards map learning [22]. An au-
tonomous robot needs mapping, localization, and path planning to complete its tasks
efﬁciently.
[11]. In 2011, Kohlbrecher et al. [29] from the Darmstadt University of Technology
proposed their fast approach for quadrotor SLAM. The latter two solutions had no path
planning involved. All these solutions are using scanning laser rangers as a key percep-
tion sensor to perform SLAM. Other researchers at the University of Pennsylvania [30]
and the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich (ETH Zurich) [31] published
similar results for SLAM or path planning with the quadrotor.
2.2.4
Mission Planning
Mission planning for an autonomous ﬂying robot is deﬁned as a set of actions which
should be taken at different times. It is part of the navigation stack and like a state
machine, it tells the robot what to do. For example, a simple mission for an autonomous
ﬂying robot which is patrolling over borders between two countries would be: ﬂy over
the curve of the border at a given altitude with a given velocity. If a moving object
is approaching the border, the ﬂying robot will calculate velocity and position of the
object and will report them to headquarters.
An artiﬁcial intelligence based solution for this task of navigation is to deﬁne a
set of navigational behaviors. Each behavior is a process or control law that achieves
and/or maintains a goal [32], [33]. As an example, Obstacle avoidance behavior main-
tains the goal of preventing collisions and follow me behavior achieves the goal of
following the position of a person. Some behaviors are prerequisites for other behav-
iors. For instance, if a robot wants to perform follow me behavior, knowledge of the
current position of the robot is required. Therefore, localization behavior is required
for following a person.
Path planning is a another important behavior that most other behaviors such as
follow me and return home rely on. For these behaviors, a path is generated between
the goal point and the current position of the robot. For more information on behaviors,
see [32].
7
[p.8]
3
Proposed Perception and Autonomy Solution
In this section, the problem of developing an autonomous quadrotor is deﬁned formally.
Advantages and disadvantages of previous methods are reviewed. Then, the proposed
solution is explained in detail. Finally, some discussions followed by contributions of
the work are presented.
3.1
System Overview
To enable a quadrotor to navigate autonomously, a set of interdependent requirements
must be addressed, including control, state estimation, map learning, and mission plan-
ning. As mentioned, autonomous navigation requires stabilization of the vehicle. To
stabilize the vehicle, the state of the vehicle must be known. In GPS-denied envi-
ronments, state estimation is calculated using simultaneous localization and mapping
algorithms. Once the state of the vehicle is known, depending on the planned mission,
the vehicle can move from one point to another using a path planning algorithm. This
section proposes an integrated solution for all these requirements.
To perceive the environment, sensors play a key role. For the autonomous quadro-
tor, a sensor suite including inertial, laser ranging, and optical sensors are used to
provide exteroceptive and proprioceptive measurements. All four levels of the auton-
omy (Fig. 2) rely on information from these sensors, directly or indirectly. The state
estimation is designed so that if GPS signals are available, they can be integrated with
the solution. The sensor suite with the developed algorithms are independent of the
hardware platform. In other words, the proposed autonomy solution with the sensor
suite can easily be ported to other robots, such as ground robots. The only necessary
change would be modifying the control level, in the navigation stack (see Fig. 2), to
apply the proper control signals to the speciﬁc actuators of the robot. As will be shown
in the experimental results, portability of the autonomy solution and the sensor suite
have been demonstrated in real-world experiments on a ground robot and a quadrotor.
3.2
Problem Statement
Developing an autonomous quadrotor for GPS-denied environments is considered to be
a challenging problem. Formally and brieﬂy, this problem can be deﬁned as to design
and develop a quadrotor capable of performing a set of tasks in GPS-denied environ-
ments, autonomously. An autonomous quadrotor needs the following tasks to navigate:
control, state estimation, map learning, and mission planning. Each of these tasks is
required to achieve autonomy. More speciﬁcally, map learning involves path planning,
localization, and mapping. The mission might be designed by a human, but the robot
must be able to perform transition between different stages of the mission. The main
challenge is that all these tasks must be performed in spite of the characteristics and
limitations of a quadrotor, such as nonlinear dynamics, small time-constant, limited
payload, vibration effect, and 3D motion. The sensor suite should enable the robot
to acquire enough data about the environment for map learning, while being designed
with consideration of the limitation of the quadrotor. Moreover, the developed solution
must run in real time.
8
[p.9]
3.3
Problems with Existing Methods and Motivations
Most research that demonstrates outstanding results with quadrotors, such as the work
by Nathan et al. [7] and Juggling Quadrotors by ETH [34], use the Vicon system. Vicon
provides very accurate positioning information and avoids dealing with the challenging
problem of map learning; however, this is not a problem that can be solved by Vicon
in every desired indoor environment: Vicon is an expensive system and needs pre-
installation. Therefore, relying on Vicon provides spatially limited autonomy. On the
other hand, compared with Vicon, alternative sensing devices such as vision, laser, and
inertial sensors are very inexpensive; however, these sensors require further processing
which is the main challenge in real-world applications.
Some studies lack path planning and exploration as an important part of map learn-
ing. For instance, in [28] and [29], a pilot is ﬂying the quadrotor, and the robot only
performs mapping and localization.
Planning a mission is another important task that most researchers ignore. The
quadrotor should be able to interact with the environment based on the priority of tasks
and transition from one task to another autonomously.
To enable the quadrotor to operate autonomously in every indoor environment, map
learning, as an alternative solution for GPS and Vicon, is the main focus of this work.
Moreover, path planning and exploration are integral to the solution. Mission planning
and transition between different behaviors and tasks are also important parts of the
work. All these elements provide a complete autonomy package for a quadrotor.
3.4
Description of the Method
An overview of the proposed autonomy system is shown in Fig. 4. The proposed solu-
tion is composed of two main modules: Mission Planner and Autonomy. Each module
consists of several blocks. Mission Planner takes care of sequencing the autonomous
behaviors. The Autonomy module accepts behaviors from Mission Planner and takes
actions to achieve or maintain the goal of the behavior.
The sensor suite includes an IMU, a scanning laser rangeﬁnder with a horizon-
tal scan, a second scanning laser rangeﬁnder with a vertical scan, a Kinect camera,
an altimeter, and a GPS. Sensors connected by a dashed line to the autonomy blocks
are optional sensors. In 2D SLAM, a 2D view-based SLAM is performed using the
horizontal scanning laser rangeﬁnder and the IMU. This block outputs 2D Cartesian
coordinates and yaw angle. In the rgbdSLAM block, a Kinect camera is used to do 3D
SLAM. Using the accelerometers of the IMU, in the KF Fusion block, the results of
these two blocks and the measurement from the altimeter are fused by a Kalman ﬁlter.
If there exists any GPS measurement, it is fused with the estimated pose to provide an
estimation with bounded error. The estimated pose is then used by the Planner block
to ﬁnd waypoints and plan paths between waypoints. The calculated waypoints and
position feedback are passed to the controller block to drive the quadrotor. Obstacle
Avoidance block has the highest priority and directly uses the laser ranger to avoid
obstacles. Although in the Planner block, the path planning algorithm makes plans
taking into account the obstacles; however, dynamic obstacles or situations caused by
disturbances or controller inaccuracies require an obstacle avoidance plan with a higher
9
[p.10]
laser scan rate. In the voxel mapping block, a 3D volumetric map is generated by the
vertical scanning laser rangeﬁnder using the ﬁltered pose.
Mission Planner (Autonomous Behaviors)
IMU
Laser
Laser
quadrotor
(horizontal)
Kinect
Altimeter
(vertical)
. . .
GPS
Autonomy
2d SLAM
rgbdSLAM
KF Fusion
Obstacle
Avoidance
Planner
Controller
Voxel
Mapping
Return-Home
Move-to-Goal
Follow-me
Hover
Explore
Figure 4: Proposed autonomous navigation in GPS-denied environments is composed
of two main modules: Mission Planner and Autonomy. Mission Planner takes care of
organizing and sequencing the autonomous behaviours. The Autonomy block accepts
these behaviours and takes proper actions.
3.4.1
Autonomous Behaviors
Autonomous behaviors are a set of behaviors designed to navigate the robot efﬁciently.
These behaviors rely on exploration, path planning, and obstacle avoidance behaviors.
Behaviors such as follow-me, go-home, move-to-goal and return-to-me are based on
the path planning behaviour between two given points and the follow-path behaviour.
Obstacle avoidance, a behavior with the highest priority, is performed at two levels.
First, it is performed at the map level where occupied cells are dilated and an optimal
path is designed. Second, it is performed using the laser ranger and keeping a safe
distance from instantaneous detected obstacles which are closer than a pre-speciﬁed
threshold.
Any complicated mission can be represented as a set of behaviors. A sample mis-
sion composed of the aforementioned behaviors is presented in Fig. 5. In this mission
10
[p.11]
(mapping, localization, and path planning are not shown for clarity), ﬁrst the robot ex-
plores the environment (explore behavior). Once exploration is complete, it moves to a
given goal point (move-to-goal behavior). Once it reaches the destination, it returns to
the start point where the mission was started (go-home behavior).
Figure. 5 depicts the state machine of the navigation. Two behaviors, obstacle
avoidance and hold (as an emergency stop), have a higher priority than others.
The transition between behaviours is determined by their priorities and also by their
state of accomplishment. For behaviors such as go-home, move-to-goal, and follow-
path, the accomplishment criteria is the distance of the robot to the goal. If the distance
is less than a threshold, the behaviour is assumed to be done and the next behavior
starts. A behavior can also be called while another behavior is running, depending on
the priority of the behaviors. For example, if the robot is exploring an environment,
but suddenly a dynamic object appears in the ﬁeld of view, then the new behavior
is avoiding obstacle. Once there is no risk of collision, the robot retrieves its previous
behaviour, and the exploration behaviour continues until there is nothing left to explore.
Exploration
Start
End
Hold
Obstacle
avoidance
Move-to-goal
Return
home
Figure 5: A sample mission composed of basic navigation behaviours. First, the robot
explores an unknown environment, then it moves to a given goal. Once it arrives at the
goal, it returns home. While performing these behaviours, obstacle avoidance and hold
(as an emergency stop) are running at a higher priority than others. Once any of these
high priority tasks ends, the previous state of the mission is resumed. This transition to
the previous behavior is shown by dashed arrows.
3.4.2
2D SLAM
The quadrotor can ﬂy at a ﬁxed altitude; therefore, a 2D grid map is generated and used
for navigation. The horizontal scanning laser ranger is used to perform 2D SLAM and
generate an occupancy grid map. The method used for 2D SLAM is adopted from [29]
11
[p.12]
which is accurate and fast. In this method the scans are transformed into the stabilized
local frame given the roll and pitch angles. These angles are estimated through an
attitude and heading reference system (AHRS). Utilizing bilinear ﬁltering, scans are
matched against the current map at the rate of 40Hz.
The mapping process seeks to calculate a transformation between a current scan
and the map. Assume the transformation is represented by δ = (x, y, ψ)T . For the ith
beam of the scan, if the transformed end point of the scan is represented by si = Si(δ),
then the map value at the end point is shown by M(Si(δ)). The transformation should
minimize the difference between the current map and the new transformed scan:
δ∗= argmin
δ
n
X
i=1
(1 −M(Si(δ)))2,
(1)
where n is the number of scan beams and δ∗is the desired outcome. This problem is
formulated and solved in [29] using the gradient ascent approach. To do this, ﬁrst order
Taylor expansion is applied to equation (1) and the resulting Gauss-Newton equation
is solved.
To speed up the mapping process and avoid local minima, a multi-resolution map
representation is used [29]. The multi-resolution map representation can also be used
for path planning and navigation purposes.
3.4.3
3D GraphSLAM
Features of the environment can be used to calculate the pose of the robot. To perform
feature-based SLAM, at least one camera is needed. The result from the feature-based
SLAM can act as an extra source of information for data fusion by Kalman ﬁltering.
In this work, feature-based SLAM is accomplished by a Kinect camera using the rgbd-
SLAM algorithm.
An RGB-D camera is a sensing system that captures RGB images with depth in-
formation for each pixel. Generally, RGB-D cameras use either stereo technology [35]
or infrared (IR) time-of-ﬂight sensing [36]. Kinect [37] is an IR-based RGB-D camera
developed by PrimeSense which has recently attracted the attention of researchers.
The rgbdSLAM algorithm, which uses an RGB-D camera, is a robust feature-based
SLAM algorithm in which features of the environment are extracted and used for lo-
calization and mapping. Inputs of the rgbdSLAM are color (RGB) and depth images,
captured simultaneously. These two images are processed to extract the pose of the
camera and build up the map of the environment. Figure 6 shows the required pro-
cessing blocks of the rgbdSLAM [38], [39]. The ﬁrst three blocks, speeded up robust
feature (SURF), random sample consensus (RANSAC), and generalized iterative clos-
est point (GICP), provide accurate visual odometry. The last block, hierarchical op-
timization for pose graphs on manifolds (HOGMAN), provides global consistency of
transformations and detects loop closures. In the visual odometry, ﬁrst SURF features
are extracted from the RGB image. Based on the correspondence of the depth values
of the features, the transformation between images is extracted using RANSAC. This
is an initial estimate and needs to be reﬁned by the GICP algorithm. Here each block
is explained in detail.
12
[p.13]
Feature Extraction and Matching
(SURF)
RGB
Image
Image
Depth
Data
Association
Initial Pose Estimation
(RANSAC)
Pose Reﬁnement
(GICP)
Pose Graph Optimization
(HOGMAN)
3D Model
Figure 6: Flow chart of rgbdSLAM [39]. Data association in rgbdSLAM is composed
of two components, RANSAC and GICP. RANSAC provides an initial estimate of the
transformation matrix. The initial estimate is used in the batch data association of
GICP to reﬁne the results.
Feature Extraction and Matching.
To extract features from images, the speeded up
robust feature (SURF) method is used. This method is based on scale-invariant feature
transform (SIFT), but it is several times faster and more robust against different image
transformations. SURF relies on sums of approximated two dimensional Haar wavelet
responses and integral images. The extracted features are matched against features
from the previous image. Then using the depth image at locations of the corresponding
features, a set of point-wise and 3D correspondences between frames is generated. This
set is used for localization by further processing.
Initial Estimation.
The 3D matching features are used to ﬁnd the relative trans-
formation between the frames using random sample consensus (RANSAC) method.
RANSAC estimates a mathematical model from a set of observed data iteratively. The
data is assumed to be noisy and contain inliers and outliers. This can produce false
models in case the assumption does not hold. The extracted transformation through
this method is not accurate and needs to be reﬁned. The next block uses this estimate
as an initial estimate to reﬁne the results.
Estimation Reﬁnement.
Data association is the key element of localization and
mapping. This becomes more important when SLAM relies on features only. Cor-
rect localization relies on ﬁnding correct correspondences between observations and
the available map. Incorrect associations may cause pose estimates to rapidly diverge.
A signiﬁcant improvementin robustness and accuracy of data association is achieved
by using batch data association. In batch data association a set of observations is as-
13
[p.14]
signed at once, instead of individual assignment and association. By this approach,
geometric relations of features are taken into account and association distinction will
be based on their combined association likelihoods.
If the observed features are internally correlated (which is the case in most SLAM
applications), then batch data association techniques can improve the results. As ex-
plained in the rgbdSLAM and shown in Fig. 6, GICP [40] is the technique used for
batch data association. GICP is initialized with RANSAC which is required to provide
accurate results. GICP takes two sets of features as inputs with an initial estimate of
their relative transformation. Unlike most other techniques, GICP takes into account
the internal geometry of the features by assigning a plane to each set and produces more
accurate results. GICP is based on the locally planar structure of point clouds where
plane-to-plane distance is used instead of point-to-point distance. In this method, max-
imum likelihood estimation is used to estimate the required transformation iteratively.
Pose Graph Optimization.
The global and consistent mapping of the SLAM algo-
rithm is based on the hierarchical optimization for pose graphs on manifolds (HOG-
MAN) [41]. HOGMAN is a 2D/3D optimization approach for graphSLAM. It consid-
ers the underlying space as a manifold, not a Euclidian space. The method is accurate
and efﬁcient, and it works well in online operations.
Generally, in graphSLAM, poses of the robot are represented as nodes in a graph.
The edges connecting nodes are modeled with motion and observation constraints.
These constraints are extracted and calculated by the SLAM front-end. Next, these
constraints need to be optimized to calculate the spatial distribution of the nodes and
their uncertainties [23]. This is performed by the SLAM back-end [41]. Usually the
optimization by the back-end takes more time and memory than extracting the con-
straints; therefore, it runs at a lower frequency.
Calculating constraints by observations is a data association problem. The data
association usually operates locally; thus, the search space is limited. The limit for the
search space can be achieved by considering the uncertainty of the pose estimates.
In HOGMAN, the optimization is performed by Gauss-Newton with sparse Cholesky
factorization. The state space is represented as a manifold and therefore avoids the pa-
rameterization singularities for estimating 3D rotations. This optimization is performed
using a hierarchical method. The lower level of the hierarchy represents the original
constraints, while the higher level corresponds to the abstract structural information.
The task for the back-end is to ﬁnd the conﬁguration of the nodes in such a way that
the likelihood of the observations is maximized. Put mathematically, for two nodes, i
and j, let xi and xj be two poses and zij and Ωij be their mean and information matrix
of the edge that connects node i to node j. Furthermore, assume eij is the innovation
of the observation (i.e, the difference of the expected observation and the sensed ob-
servation). GraphSLAM seeks to ﬁnd a conﬁguration of nodes, x⋆, that minimizes the
negative log likelihood of all measurements:
x⋆= argminx
X
(i,j)∈C
eT
ijΩijeij,
(2)
where C is the set of pairs of indices that an observation constraint exists for them.
14
[p.15]
Linearizing (2) by Taylor expansion, the following relation is the result
H∆x⋆= b,
(3)
where the matrix H is a sparse information matrix of the system and b is the residual
vector. This allows equation (3) to be solved efﬁciently by sparse Cholesky factoriza-
tion. Once ∆x⋆is solved, it is added to the initial estimate to ﬁnd the optimized poses
(i.e., x = ˆx + ∆x⋆).
In all solutions of graphSLAM, the main challenge is how to solve equations (2)
and (3). HOGMAN uses iterative Gauss-Newton on a manifold to solve (3). In the
iterative approach, each time the result is used as an initial estimate for the next iter-
ation. The main difference distinguishing HOGMAN from other methods is that the
HOGMAN linearizes on a manifold rather than in Euclidean space. Linearization in
Euclidian space is not a valid assumption for SLAM, since orientation angles span a
non-Euclidean space.
3.4.4
State Estimation
Results from SLAM are fused with the information from the IMU by a Kalman ﬁlter
to provide state estimation. This estimate is used by the planner and controller blocks.
Prior to using IMU measurements in the Kalman ﬁltering, they are ﬁltered by an AHRS
system; therefore, IMU measurements are not present in the state vector of the system.
The state of the system is deﬁned as
x =
rT
vTT ,
(4)
where r is the position of the robot and v is the velocity of the robot.
r
=
x
y
zT ,
(5)
v
=
 ˙x
˙y
˙zT .
(6)
The Kalman ﬁlter operates in two steps: prediction and update. The state prediction
is performed using the accelerometers of the IMU, a =

ax
ay
az
T, given the
following system equations
˙r
=
v
(7)
˙v
=
Ra + g,
(8)
where g is the constant gravity vector and R is the direction cosine matrix. Euler angles
from the AHRS are used in the direction cosine matrix. When a measurement from
the accelerometers is available, the prediction is performed. The covariance matrix
accompanied with the state vector is a 6 × 6 matrix which is initially zeros. More
details about the Kalman ﬁltering can be found in [23].
In the update step, the state of the system is updated using the other sensors. The
altimeter, visual and laser measurements are used to update the state. For instance, a
measurement from the horizontal laser ranger is used to update x and y coordinates,
15
[p.16]
since the horizontal laser ranger provides only the 2D coordinates. An altimeter updates
only the z coordinate. Although the proposed system does not rely on GPS signals, if
GPS measurements are available, they can also be used to update the coordinates in the
update step.
3.4.5
Planner: Exploration of Unknown Space
To explore an unknown environment, the frontier algorithm is used. This algorithm
uses unknown cells located in the boundaries of the known cells as frontiers and moves
towards them [42]. Algorithm 1 explains the frontier exploration. According to the
algorithm, ﬁrst frontier cells are extracted (line 2). Then the frontier cells are clus-
tered based on connectivity-eight (line 3). Assuming that there are m clusters (line 4),
for each cluster, ﬁrst the center of the cluster is calculated (line 6); then the distance
between the center of the cluster and the robot is calculated (line 7). (xi
c, yi
c) is the
center of the ith cluster, i = 1..m, and di
c is the distance of the cluster from the robot.
The number of cells in each cluster is calculated in line 8, shown by ni
c for the ith
cluster. Finally, the center of a cluster that has more frontier cells and is closer to the
current position of the robot is chosen as the next waypoint. This means that a cluster
is chosen which can minimize the ratio of ni
c
dic . Because of the perception range of the
sensors, there is no need to wait for the robot to get to the target waypoint. Therefore,
this process can continue and update the waypoints at ﬁxed time intervals or distances.
In this work, waypoints are updated every 4 meters, which eliminates the oscillatory
behavior of the robot between the waypoints. Exploration terminates when there is no
new waypoint, cwp = ∅. This occurs, for instance, when there is no frontier cell left,
or when the number of the cells in each cluster is negligible.
Algorithm 1 Frontier exploration.
Input: m: partially explored map,
(xr, yr): global coordinates of the robot
Output: cwp: waypoint
1: U, C ←∅
2: U ←frontier cells.
3: C ←clusters of U.
4: m ←|C|
5: for i = 1 →m do
6:
(xi
c, yi
c) ←centroid of the ith cluster
7:
di
c =
p
(xr −xic)2 + (yr −yic)2
8:
ni
c ←number of cells of each cluster
9: end for
10: cwp ←argmaxci ni
c
dic .
Once the next waypoint for the exploration is known, a path planning algorithm is
used to guide the robot to the new waypoint.
16
[p.17]
3.4.6
Planner: Path Planning
To navigate between two given points, the wavefront algorithm is used. This is per-
formed using the map generated while exploring the environment. The wavefront pro-
duces an optimal solution and no local minima are generated [26]. The details of the
wavefront path planning are given in Algorithm 2. To avoid getting close to the ob-
stacles, occupied cells are dilated such that the planner generates a path with a safe
distance from obstacles (line 1). The free space is represented by a grid, marked with
0 as unvisited (line 5). The occupied and dilated cells are marked with 1 (line 6). The
algorithm generates a wave from the goal cell. The goal cell is marked as a visited
cell and given a value of 2 as the start point of the wavefront (line 7-8). The algorithm
then iteratively ﬁnds unvisited (marked with 0) neighbors of the wave cells and assigns
them values of one greater than the visited wave cell (line 10-12). The result will be a
‘wavefront’ radiating outwards from the goal cell as new cells are assigned increasing
values. Once the wave reaches the start point, the planner travels back on the wave
using gradient descent and generates the path (line 14-19).
Fig. 7 shows an example of the wavefront path planning algorithm. In Fig. 7-a, a
simulated environment with obstacles is depicted. Obstacles are shown in black and
the free space is shown in white. The start point is marked with a green circle and the
goal point is marked with a red square. A path should be designed from the start point
to the goal point. The dilated areas are shown in gray. In Fig. 7-b, obstacles are dilated
to avoid getting too close to the obstacles. In Fig. 7-c, a wave is generated from the
goal point to the start point. The wave is colour coded. Finally, Fig. 7-d shows the path
designed using the generated wave.
3.4.7
Obstacle Avoidance
Obstacle avoidance is achieved using laser beams directly to avoid any unexpected
collisions caused by disturbance or dynamic objects. Laser beams are smoothed by a
sliding window to remove noisy measurements. Then beams are divided into b bins
(for example, for the Hokuyo UTM-30LX laser ranger, 54 bins are used, each covering
5◦). The range of a bin is deﬁned as the average range of laser beams in that bin. A
collision bin is one which identiﬁes an obstacle within a given range. This bin has
collision risks. A free bin has a range greater than a threshold. The free bin is the
bin used to avoid the collision. If a bin is identiﬁed as a collision bin, then the current
waypoint is changed such that the new waypoint has 180◦offset from the collision bin.
Algorithm 3 summarizes the obstacle avoidance. Inputs to the algorithm are: the
scan s, the current waypoint wc, number of bins b which is used to divide the scan
into b sectors, and angular span of the scan α. The output is a new waypoint wn. If
the robot is too close to an obstacle, a waypoint in the collision-free zone of the scan
is produced. Otherwise, the waypoint is not changed. In line 1, the collision bin is
initialized. In line 2, the free bin is initialized. wn is calculated from this bin. In line
3, the scan is ﬁltered by a low pass ﬁlter to remove noisy sparks. In line 4, the scan
is divided into b bins, and each bin is checked to see if there is any risk of collision.
This is performed by function check collision(·). If there is a risk of collision within
a bin, then the identiﬁcation number (ID) of the bin is returned for further processing.
17
[p.18]
Algorithm 2 Wavefront path planning
Input: m: map, qstart: start cell, qgoal: goal cell, rdilate: dilation size
Output: p: path
1: dilate occupied cell for rdilate cells
2: if qgoal or qstart are located within the dilated cells then
3:
relocate them to the closest free cell.
4: end if
5: mark all free space with 0, as unvisited
6: mark all occupied, dilated and unknown cells with 1
7: index ←2
8: qgoal ←index
9: while qstart not visited do
10:
set all free cells neighboring a cell with value index to index + 1
11:
mark all cells with value index + 1 as visited
12:
index ←index + 1
13: end while
14: q ←qstart
15: add q to p
16: while qgoal not in p do
17:
q ←neighbor of q with minimum value
18:
add q to p
19: end while
Based on the ID of the collision bin, a free bin is selected. To do this, ﬁrst, a candidate
bin is chosen with 180◦angular offset from the collision bin. If the candidate bin is
also a collision bin, the closest collision-free bin to the candidate bin is selected as the
free bin. This operation is performed by function find free bin(·) in line 6. In line
7, the next waypoint from the collision-free bin is calculated. The bearing of the new
waypoint with respect to the current pose of the robot is equal to the orientation of the
free bin. The range of the new waypoint with respect to the current position of the
robot is a ﬁxed number. In this research, it is set to be one meter. Once the robot is out
of collision risk, it resumes its previous behavior.
3.4.8
3D Voxel Mapping
The 3D voxel mapping is based on a compact and ﬂexible 3D mapping algorithm,
known as Octomap [43]. Octomap uses octree mapping. An octree is a tree-like data
structure where each node can have eight children. In an octree structure, a three di-
mensional space is subdivided into eight octants recursively. Similar to the 2D occu-
pancy grid mapping, Octomap takes into account the probability of the occupancy of
each voxel. This capability makes it a probabilistic map which can be used in dynamic
environments. The occupancy probability of a voxel v given the sensor measurements
from time 1 to t, z1:t is estimated by [43]
p(v|z1:t) =

1 + 1 −p(v|zt)
p(v|zt)
1 −p(v|z1:t−1)
p(v|z1:t−1)
1 −p(v)
p(v)
−1
(9)
18
[p.19]
a
b
c
d
Figure 7: An example of the wavefront algorithm. a) A simulated environment with
obstacles. Obstacles are shown in black while the free space is shown in white. A path
should be designed from the start point, the green circle, to a goal point, the red square.
b) Obstacles are dilated to avoid getting too close to the obstacles. The dilated areas
are shown in gray. c) A wave is generated from the goal point to the start point. The
wave is colour coded. d) Using the generated wave, a path between the start and goal
points is designed, shown by a black curve.
where p(v) is the initial state of the voxel. Octomap is a ﬂexible mapping method
which does not need to know the extent of the map in advance. In fact, the map expands
dynamically as required. Since it models occupied, free, and unknown octants, it can
be used in exploration and path planning applications. In this work, the vertical laser
ranger is used to generate a 3D Octomap.
3.4.9
Controller
The controller block accepts waypoints generated by the planner block and adjusts
rotor speeds. The controller block is not a part of this work. Nagaty et al. [3] de-
veloped a cascaded controller for a quadrotor which is used here. The controller is
composed of inner loop and outer loop PID controllers. The inner loop controller sta-
bilizes roll, pitch, yaw and altitude while the outer loop controller is responsible for
position tracking or waypoint following. The controller is tuned properly to deal with
19
[p.20]
Algorithm 3 Obstacle avoidance
Input: s: laser scan, wc: current waypoint, b: number of bins, α: angular coverage of
a scan
Output: wn: next waypoint
1: collision bin id ←∅
2: free bin id ←∅
3: s ←smooth(s)
4: collision bin id ←check collision(s, b)
5: if collision bin̸ = ∅then
6:
free bin id ←find free bin(collision bin id, α, b)
7:
wn ←waypoint(free bin id)
8: else
9:
wn ←wc
10: end if
11: return wn
a
b
Figure 8: An example of an octree structure. a) Occupied and free octants depicted
in black and gray. Other octants are unknown. b) The corresponding tree representa-
tion [43].
minor disturbances.
During ﬂight tests, there is the risk of damaging the ﬂying robot. It is very important
to have the option of taking over the control of the robot manually at all positions and
times.
3.5
Advantages and Disadvantages
In this section, the advantages and disadvantages of each component in the autonomy
solution are reviewed separately.
Mission planning is composed of a set of basic behaviors which can be used to
create a mission. The advantage of using basic behaviors is obvious: almost any type
of mission is composed of a set of basic behaviors. The core of these behaviors is
dependent on planning and following a path from one point to another point. This,
in turn, relies on the knowledge of the position of the robot within the environment,
20
[p.21]
which is taken care of by SLAM. For instance, follow me and go home are two different
behaviors but in fact they are very similar. The ﬁrst one requires a path from the current
position of the robot to the position of a person. The second one needs a path from the
current position of the robot to the start point of the mission.
The wavefront path planning algorithm is a fast algorithm which avoids local min-
ima and generates an optimal path [26]. Moreover, it is relatively easy to implement;
however, there are two problems with this algorithm. First, it does not generate a
smooth path. Second, it creates paths which are sometimes very close to obstacles.
The ﬁrst problem is solved during path following. The path following process selects
waypoints from the path which automatically smoothes the path. For the second prob-
lem, obstacles are dilated to avoid the path getting too close to the obstacles. Also, this
algorithm relies on the map of the environment; thus, if a goal point is given to the
algorithm which is out of the scope of the map, then it fails to generate a path.
The 2D SLAM algorithm is a fast and robust method. Extensive experiments with a
ground robot and the COBRA quadrotor has demonstrated its performance. Quadrotors
have fast dynamics; therefore, it is important to provide pose estimates as frequently
as possible. The 2D SLAM algorithm operates at 40Hz which is an acceptable rate to
control a quadrotor.
The rgbdSLAM algorithm is a solution based on graphSLAM. Generally, graph-
SLAM solutions tend to be slow. While 2D SLAM operates at 40Hz, rgbdSLAM
performs at about 1Hz. However, rgbdSLAM provides a 3D solution which recov-
ers Cartesian coordinates and the orientation of the robot. Also, rgbdSLAM relies on
features; therefore, if the environment lacks features, it may fail.
The Kinect camera is a part of the sensor suite which is used for rgbdSLAM. The
main problem with the Kinect camera is its weight, about 400 grams, which is a rel-
atively heavy load for a typical quadrotor. There is at least one laser ranger onboard
which weighs about 370 grams. To ﬂy a Kinect camera with the laser ranger, a quadro-
tor with larger payload-carrying capability is needed.
4
Experiment
To test the proposed perception and navigation solution, the mission shown in Fig. 5
was implemented. The experiments were implemented and tested in three different
conﬁgurations, including:
• Simulation in Gazebo,
• Real-world experiment: unmanned ground vehicle, and
• Real-world experiment: quadrotor rotorcraft.
Each experiment is explained in detail. Additionally, two more experiments, demon-
strating other behaviors, are also presented.
21
[p.22]
4.1
Case 1: Simulation in Gazebo
The proposed solution for perception and navigation is tested in a simulated Gazebo
world. Gazebo is a three-dimensional and multi-robot simulator which simulates a
team of robots, objects, and various sensors [44]. It also simulates gravity and interac-
tion between objects. Gazebo has been integrated with ROS.
4.1.1
Simulated Flying Robot
The developed simulated quadrotor model is based on the X8 [45] rotorcraft, designed
and built by Draganﬂy Innovations Inc. The X8 has four pairs of rotors, which provide
more thrust than four rotors. The simulated robot is designed in Blender and then
integrated with Gazebo. The robot is equipped with a simulated IMU, a SONAR, and
two Hokuyo UTM-30LX scanning laser rangers, mounted horizontally and vertically.
4.1.2
Description
Fig. 9-a shows the Gazebo world. The size of the simulated world is 32 × 50 meters.
Seven cylinders, each with the diameter of one meter, are placed in the world as ob-
stacles. The distance between any two adjacent cylinders is ﬁve meters. The height of
walls and obstacles is six meters. During ﬂight, the robot ﬂies at an altitude of three
meters.
For this experiment, the mission shown in Fig 5 is executed. According to this
mission, ﬁrst, the robot explores the world, then it goes to a goal point, and ﬁnally, it
returns to the start point. The robot is initially placed at the origin of the coordinate
system (Fig. 9-a). The goal, which it attains after the exploration, is located 30 meters
away, marked by a red disc.
4.1.3
Results
The complete mission took 210 seconds to perform. In Fig. 9-b, the map developed by
the horizontal laser ranger is shown. Fig. 9-c shows the voxel map of the environment,
developed by the vertical laser ranger. A video of the experiment including all states
of the mission, i.e., exploration, move to goal, and return home, can be found in [46].
To evaluate the performance of the autonomous navigation, a few criteria are in-
vestigated. These criteria evaluate the accuracy of localization and the mission accom-
plishment.
4.1.4
Evaluating Pose Localization
Since the ground-truth position of the robot is available in the simulation, it is possible
to compare the estimated position with the ground-truth position. Assume r and rgt
are positions of the robot through SLAM and ground-truth respectively. The same is
assumed for orientations of the robot through Ωand Ωgt variables. The following
22
[p.23]
a
b
c
Start
Goal
Figure 9: Simulation in Gazebo. a) Simulation environment. Size of the world is
32×50 metres. Magniﬁed simulated X8 is shown inside a circle with two perpendicular
laser rangers mounted beneath the rotorcraft. b) Trajectory and 2D map.c) 3D voxel
map.
23
[p.24]
relations evaluate the error of the position and orientation
er
=
||r −rgt||,
(10)
eΩ
=
||wrap(Ω−Ωgt)||,
(11)
where wrap(·) is a function which bounds the orientation so that the orientation is
within the interval of (−π, π]. For two vectors of the same size, such as p and q, the
operator ||·|| shows the Euclidian distance deﬁned as ||p−q|| =
p
(p −q) · (p −q),
where the · is the dot product.
4.1.5
Evaluating Mission Accomplishment
The implemented mission has two target points that the robot should attain. After
the exploration phase is ﬁnished, the ﬁrst target point is set as the goal point (the red
disc). Once the robot has reached the goal point, the target point is switched the the
second goal point that is deﬁned to be the original starting point. The coordinates
of target points are known, so by comparing the position of the target points to the
ground-truthposition of the robot, it is possible to calculate an error measure to evaluate
targeting accuracy. If the 2D coordinates of the goal are (xg, yg) and the 2D ground-
truth position of the robot, when it arrives at the goal, is (xgt, ygt), then the target
achievement error is deﬁned as
eg =
q
(xg −xgt)2 + (yg −ygt)2.
(12)
Fig. 10 shows the error of the position of the robot, er, during the mission. The
average error is 0.0065 meters. Table 1 summarizes the performance indices. In this
table, the ﬁrst row represents the average position error over the course of the mission.
The second row shows the average orientation error over the course of the mission.
Rows 3 and 4 show the error of the position when the robot is at the goal and start
points.
Table 1: Evaluating the experiment in Gazebo.
no
index
value
1
average position error, er
0.0065 (m)
2
average orientation error, eΩ
0.0016 (rad)
3
error of achieving goal point
0.09 (m)
4
error of achieving start point
0.02 (m)
4.2
Case 2: Unmanned Ground Robot
To make sure that the proposed solution works well in the real world, we started the
experiments with a CoroBot built by CoroWare, Inc. The main objective for this test is
to avoid crashing the ﬂying robot due to unpredicted run-time problems. Furthermore,
it is easier to test functionality of different components of the proposed solution on a
24
[p.25]
0
50
100
150
200
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
0.05
error (m)
time (s)
Figure 10: Robot position error, er, during mission.
ground robot than on a ﬂying robot. This experiment shows that the proposed method
and sensor suite are suitable to achieve the desired goals.
4.2.1
Description
This test was performed in a room at the University of New Brunswick. The size of the
room is approximately 5 × 12 meters and four garbage bins were placed in the room
as obstacles. Because of the ﬂoor is ﬂat, there was no rolling or pitching involved.
Fig. 11-a shows the CoroBot in the test environment. The robot is equipped with one
horizontal laser ranger, an IMU, and two encoders.
4.2.2
Results
Fig. 11-b shows the map of the environment with the trajectory of the robot (red curve)
and the planned path (green curve). A video of the experiment can be found in [46].
All states of the mission are shown in the video.
4.3
Case 3: Quadrotor in an Indoor Environment
This real-world experiment was performed with the custom-built COBRA quadrotor.
The COBRA quadrotor is a custom-built four-rotor rotorcraft designed and developed
at the COBRA lab at the University of New Brunswick (UNB). It is equipped with
25
[p.26]
a
b
Figure 11: Experiment with a CoroBot robot. a) The robot and the experimental envi-
ronment. b) Trajectory and 2D map. The blue arrow shows the goal, the green curve
shows the planned path and the red curve shows the trajectory of the robot. The per-
pendicular green and red bars show the body frame coordinates. The small cyan ball
on the planned path shows the waypoint to be followed by the robot.
a Hokuyo UTM-30LX scanning laser ranger, a CH Robotics UM6 IMU, and a Sen-
sComps MINI-A PB Ultrasonic Transducer SONAR ranger. The scanning laser ranger
is mounted upside down for more stability during ﬂight. Fig. 12 shows the quadrotor.
A Gumstix Overo board is used to interface sensors and send data to a ground station.
4.3.1
Description
The test environment is approximately 94.7m2 and two boxes are placed in the envi-
ronment as obstacles. Fig. 13 shows the quadrotor in the test environment. According
to the mission plan, shown in Fig. 5 and starting from the point shown by a black circle
in Fig. 13-a, ﬁrst, the quadrotor explores the environment and maps all unknown places
such as behind boxes. Then it moves to a goal point, shown by a black square. Finally,
it returns home, where it started the mission.
4.3.2
Results
The whole mission took about 320sec, with an average speed of 0.25m/s. Fig 13-b
shows the robot at approximately 280 seconds into the test, where the robot is returning
home. The green curve shows the path generated by the planner. The red curve shows
the trajectory of the robot. The arrow shows the ﬁnal destination of the robot which is
the home. The cyan sphere shows a waypoint along the path, generated by the planner
for the quadrotor. (The path, the trajectory and the waypoint are projected to the ground
level for clarity of the ﬁgure.) A video of the experiment is available in [46]. The robot
successfully completed the mission by exploring, mapping, and navigating through
obstacles.
Fig. 14 shows the path of the robot for each stage of the mission. Starting from the
26
[p.27]
Figure 12: The COBRA quadrotor equipped with a scanning laser rangeﬁnder, an IMU,
and a SODAR.
point marked with the black circle, the blue curve shows the path of the exploration.
The black curve shows the path of the move to goal behavior where the goal is depicted
by a black square. The green curve shows the path of the return home behavior. The
red curve shows the trajectory of the robot during all three stages.
Fig. 15-a shows the performance of the waypoint following. The error at each time
shows the distance between the current position of the robot and the given waypoint
at that time. To show the process, Fig. 15-b shows an enlarged section of the error
enclosed by a red rectangle in Fig. 15-a. The vertical lines indicates the times when
a new waypoint was generated by the planner and the quadrotor tried to follow the
waypoint. The planner updates waypoints at the approximate rate of 2Hz and tries to
keep the waypoints at a ﬁxed distance of 0.9m from the current position of the robot,
unless the robot is close to the ﬁnal goal. Once the robot is closer than 0.5 meters to a
given goal, the planner asks the robot to hover.
Table 2 summarizes the performance indices for this experiment. In this experi-
ment, the ground-truth data is not available, so evaluation of the localization error is
not possible. Rows 1 and 2 show the error of the position when the robot is in the goal
and start points.
4.4
Case 4: Autonomous Entry and Exit
This is another simulated and real-world experiment performed with COBRA quadro-
tor. The purpose of this test is to demonstrate the capability of the quadrotor in tran-
27
[p.28]
a
b
Figure 13: Experiment with COBRA quadrotor. This experiment, performs the three-
stage mission depicted in Fig. 5: exploration, move-to-goal, and return-home. a) This
ﬁgure shows the test environment. b) A snapshot of the developed map and trajectory
of the robot.
Table 2: Evaluating the real-world experiment with COBRA quadrotor.
no
index
value
1
error of achieving goal point
0.16 (m)
2
error of achieving start point
0.11 (m)
sition from outdoors to indoors. Details of the experiment including ﬂight time, the
28
[p.29]
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
 
 
exploration path
move−to−goal path
return−home path
trajectory of robot
start point
goal point
x (m)
y (m)
Figure 14: Paths and trajectory of the robot for each stage of the three-stage mission
depicted in Fig.
5: exploration, move-to-goal, and return-home. The start point is
shown by a circle. First the quadrotor explores the environment. The desired path for
the exploration is shown in blue. Then it goes to the goal point marked by a square
(move-to-goal). Once it reached the goal, it returned home.
29
[p.30]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
0.5
1
1.5
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
x (m)
x (m)
time (s)
time (s)
Figure 15: Performance of waypoint following. a) Waypoint following error for the
whole trajectory shown in Fig. 14 b) Enlarged section of the waypoint following error
enclosed in a red rectangle in Fig. 15-a. The vertical solid black lines indicate the times
when a new waypoint is received. The quadrotor tries to follow the waypoint.
30
[p.31]
length of the path, and the error of achieving the goal points are not reported for the
sake of brevity.
4.4.1
Description
For the simulated experiment, performed in Gazebo, a building was simulated which is
unknown for the robot. It starts the mission outside of the building and the mission is
to go inside, map the building, and return to the start point. Notice that in this simple
scenario, exploration is not involved. The robot chooses a traversable goal point inside
the building, ﬂies to the point according to the planned path, and returns. The same
scenario is implemented for the real-world experiment. These experiments demonstrate
the ability of the robot to move from outdoors to indoors which is an important task in
most autonomy solutions.
4.4.2
Results
Fig. 16 shows the simulated experiment. The ﬁgure represents the moment that the
robot is returning to the start point. In Fig. 16-a, a snapshot of the simulated world
is shown. The quadrotor is inside of the building and is not visible. The green disc
is the start point. Fig. 16-b shows the developed 3D map, built by the vertical laser
rangeﬁnder. Fig. 16-c shows the camera view. Finally, Fig. 16-d demonstrates the 2D
map, developed by the horizontal laser rangeﬁnder, designed path, and trajectory of the
robot.
Fig. 17 shows the same scenario in a real-world experiment. Fig. 17-a, shows the test
environment. Fig. 17-b shows the developed map, trajectory of the robot, and designed
path to return to the start point. A video of the experiment, including both simulated
and real-world experiments, can be found in [46].
4.5
Case 5: Outdoor Unstructured Environment
This outdoor experiment demonstrates the ability of the quadrotor in mapping and nav-
igating in unstructured environments, such as woods and cliffs. The experiment is
performed at UNB Woodlot in Fredericton, New Brunswick. This experiment demon-
strates the usefulness of the quadrotor and the proposed solution in different applica-
tions such as forest and vegetation control, terrain monitoring and inspection in un-
traversable and catastrophic environments, and saving human lives trapped in danger-
ous spots.
4.5.1
Results
Fig. 18-a shows the experiment site. As the ﬁgure shows, the environment is not
traversable by ground robots. Fig. 18-b shows the 2D developed map and trajectory of
the robot. Trees and cliffs are mapped consistently by the sensor suite.
31
[p.32]
a
b
c
d
Figure 16: Autonomous entry and exit in simulation. a) Simulated world in Gazebo.
b) The developed 3D map c) Camera view. d) The developed 2D map, path, and
trajectory.
a
b
c
Figure 17: Autonomous entry and exit in a real-world experiment. This ﬁgure shows
the experiment at the moment that the quadrotor returns home. a) Onboard camera
view b) The developed 2D map, path, and trajectory. c) Ground view of the quadrotor,
exiting through the door.
32
[p.33]
a
b
Figure 18: The experiment in an outdoor unstructured environment. a) The test envi-
ronment. b) The developed map and trajectory of the robot. Laser measurements are
color-coded.
33
[p.34]
4.6
Discussion
The sequence of experiments, from the simulated quadrotor to the ground robot and
then to the COBRA quadrotor, demonstrated an efﬁcient method to construct the au-
tonomous navigation. This approach minimizes the amount of time and resources to
develop components of the system. Moreover, it shows the portability of the sensor
suite and the autonomy solution from the ground robot to the quadrotor.
In simulation, as seen in the videos, the motion of the quadrotor was smoother
than in the last experiment, performed in the real world. This is because tuning the
controller in a simulated environment is easier than in a real-world environment. Also,
wind effects are ignored in the simulated model. This can not be ignored in real-world
experiments, especially when the quadrotor is ﬂying close to the ground surface where
surface effects visibly affect the stability of the quadrotor.
This experiment was done with the onboard IMU and the laser ranger. The 2D
SLAM algorithm was able to perform localization and mapping successfully. These
two sensors are minimum sensors required to perform SLAM with the quadrotor. The
Kinect camera as an extra source of information may help provide more accurate re-
sults. According to the third experiment, the errors in attaining the target points, the
goal and the home, are very small. For the goal point, it is 0.16 meters and for the home
it is 0.11 meters. This means that the quadrotor can perform speciﬁc actions while it is
at a speciﬁc point. For instance, it can land on a target point such as a ground robot, or
it can pick up a light object from a point and put it in a speciﬁc place.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, an autonomy solution for an unmanned rotorcraft was proposed and im-
plemented. The proposed solution tackles a few key requirements for autonomous
navigation in GPS-denied environments, including mapping, localization, exploration,
and path planning. A behavior based mission control was proposed to plan, organize,
and sequence different ﬂight behaviors. The proposed solution is composed of a sensor
suite and an autonomous navigation stack which enable the quadrotor to navigate and
achieve the desired goals autonomously. The proposed autonomous navigation system
was tested in Gazebo with a simulated ﬂying rotorcraft and in real-world environments
with an unmanned ground robot and a custom-designed quadrotor. The various simu-
lated and real-world experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method
and sensor suite.
In the future, it would be desirable to extend the current work to multiple-robots:
cooperatively exploring, mapping, localizing, and performing the mission. Addition-
ally, adding a Kinect camera to the sensor suite and improving the ability of the quadro-
tor to carry heavier payloads will be investigated.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by Defence Research and Development Canada (DRDC),
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and Canada
Foundation for Innovation (CFI).
34
[p.35]
References
[1] T. Tomic, K. Schmid, P. Lutz, A. Domel, M. Kassecker, E. Mair, I. Grixa,
F. Ruess, M. Suppa, and D. Burschka, “Toward a fully autonomous UAV: Re-
search platform for indoor and outdoor urban search and rescue,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Magazine, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 46–56, 2012.
[2] I. Palunko, P. Cruz, and R. Fierro, “Agile load transportation : Safe and efﬁcient
load manipulation with aerial robots,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 69–79, 2012.
[3] A. Nagaty, S. Saeedi, C. Thibault, M. Seto, and H. Li, “Control and navigation
framework for quadrotor helicopters,” Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems,
vol. 70, no. 1-4, pp. 1–12, 2013.
[4] S. Bouabdallah, A. Noth, and R. Siegwart, “PID vs LQ control techniques applied
to an indoor micro quadrotor,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Con-
ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2004, pp. 2451–2456.
[5] X. Dong, B. M. Chen, G. Cai, H. Lin, and T. H. Lee, “Development of a com-
prehensive software system for implementing cooperative control of multiple
unmanned aerial vehicles,” International Journal of Robotics and Automation,
vol. 26, no. 1, 2011.
[6] R. Mahony, V. Kumar, and P. Corke, “Multirotor aerial vehicles: Modeling, es-
timation, and control of quadrotor,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 20–32, 2012.
[7] N. Michael, D. Mellinger, Q. Lindsey, and V. Kumar, “The GRASP multiple
micro-UAV testbed,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine, vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 56–65, 2010.
[8] A. Mokhtari, A. Benallegue, and Y. Orlov, “Exact linearization and sliding mode
observer for a quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle,” International Journal of
Robotics and Automation, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 39–49, 2006.
[9] A. Jabbar and F. M. Malik, “Sampled-data backstepping control of a quadro-
tor unmanned aerial vehicle,” International Journal of Robotics and Automation,
vol. 4, no. 2, 2014.
[10] S. Thrun, M. Diel, and D. Hahnel, “Scan alignment and 3-D surface modeling
with a helicopter platform,” Field and Service Robotics, vol. 24, pp. 287–297,
2006.
[11] S. Grzonka, G. Grisetti, and W. Burgard, “Towards a navigation system for au-
tonomous indoor ﬂying,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2009, pp. 2878–2883.
[12] A. Bachrach, R. He, and N. Roy, “Autonomous ﬂight in unknown indoor environ-
ments,” International Journal of Micro Air Vehicles, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 217–228,
2009.
35
[p.36]
[13] H. D. Whyte and T. Bailey, “Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM):
Part I the essential algorithms,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine,
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 108–117, 2006.
[14] S. Saeedi, L. Paull, M. Trentini, M. Seto, and H. Li, “Group mapping: A topo-
logical approach to map merging for multiple robots,” IEEE Robotics Automation
Magazine, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 60–72, 2014.
[15] ——, “Efﬁcient map merging using a probabilistic generalized Voronoi diagram,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), 2012, pp. 4419–4424.
[16] ——, “Map merging for multiple robots using hough peak matching,” Robotics
and Autonomous Systems, vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 1408–1424, 2014.
[17] ——, “Map merging using Hough peak matching,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
2012, pp. 4683–4688.
[18] S. Saeedi, L. Paull, M. Trentini, and H. Li, “A neural network-based multiple
robot simultaneous localization and mapping,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-
works, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2376–2387, 2011.
[19] ——, “A neural network-based multiple robot simultaneous localization and map-
ping,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2011, pp. 880–885.
[20] ——, “Occupancy grid map merging for multiple robot simultaneous localization
and mapping,” International Journal of Robotics and Automation, vol. 30, no. 2,
pp. 149–157, 2015.
[21] ——, “Multiple robot simultaneous localization and mapping,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2011, pp. 853–858.
[22] C. Stachniss, Robotic Mapping And Exploration.
Springer Tracts in Advanced
Robotics, 2009, vol. 55.
[23] S. Thrun, W. Burgard, and D. Fox, Probabilistic Robotics.
Cambridge, MA,
USA: The MIT press, 2005.
[24] S. Saeedi, M. Trentini, M. Seto, and H. Li, “Multiple-robot simultaneous local-
ization and mapping: A review,” Journal of Field Robotics, 2015.
[25] L. Paull, S. Saeedi, M. Seto, and H. Li, “Auv navigation and localization: A
review,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 131–149, 2014.
[26] H. Choset, K. M. Lynch, S. Hutchinson, G. Kantor, W. Burgard, L. E. Kavraki,
and S. Thrun, Principles of Robot Motion: Theory, Algorithms, and Implementa-
tions (Intelligent Robotics and Autonomous Agents).
The MIT Press, 2005.
36
[p.37]
[27] L. Paull, S. Saeedi, M. Seto, and H. Li, “Sensor-driven online coverage planning
for autonomous underwater vehicles,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatron-
ics, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1827–1838, 2013.
[28] I. Dryanovski, W. Morris, and J. Xiao, “An open-source pose estimation system
for micro-air vehicles,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2011, pp. 4449–4454.
[29] S. Kohlbrecher, O. v. Stryk, J. Meyer, and U. Klingauf, “A ﬂexible and scalable
SLAM system with full 3D motion estimation,” in IEEE International Symposium
on Safety, Security and Rescue Robotics (SSRR), 2011, pp. 155–160.
[30] N. Michael, S. Shen, K. Mohta, Y. Mulgaonkar, V. Kumar, K. Nagatani, Y. Okada,
S. Kiribayashi, K. Otake, K. Yoshida, K. Ohno, E. Takeuchi, and S. Tadokoro,
“Collaborative mapping of an earthquake-damagedbuilding via ground and aerial
robots,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 832–841, 2012.
[31] S. Weiss, D. Scaramuzza, and R. Siegwart, “Monocular-slambased navigation
for autonomous micro helicopters in gps-denied environments,” Journal of Field
Robotics, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 854–874, 2011.
[32] R. A. Brooks, “Elephants don’t play chess,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
vol. 6, pp. 3–15, 1990.
[33] M. J. Mataric, “Behavior-based control: Examples from navigation, learning, and
group behavior,” Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
vol. 9, pp. 323–336, 1997.
[34] 2013, retrieved June 10, 2013, from http://www.ﬂyingmachinearena.org/videos/.
[35] K. Konolige, “Projected texture stereos,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2010.
[36] 2013, retrieved June 10, 2013, http://www.mesa-imaging.ch/.
[37] 2013, retrieved June 10, 2013, http://www.primesense.com/.
[38] P. Henry, M. Krainin, E. Herbst, X. Ren, and D. Fox, “RGB-D mapping: Using
depth cameras for dense 3D modeling of indoor environments.” in Proceedings
of the International Symposium on Experimental Robotics (ISER), 2010.
[39] N. Engelhard, F. Endres, J. Hess, J. Sturm, and W. Burgard, “Real-time 3D visual
SLAM with a hand-held RGB-D camera,” in Proceedings of the RGB-D Work-
shop on 3D Perception in Robotics at the European Robotics Forum, 2011.
[40] A. Segal, D. Haehnel, and S. Thrun, “Generalized ICP,” in Proceedings of of
Robotics, Science and Systems (RSS), 2009.
[41] G. Grisetti, R. Kummerle, C. Stachniss, U. Frese, and C. Hertzberg, “Hierarchical
optimization on manifolds for online 2D and 3D mapping,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2010.
37
[p.38]
[42] B. Yamauchi, A. Schultz, and W. Adams, “Integrating exploration and localiza-
tion for mobile robots,” Autonomous Robots, 1999.
[43] K. Wurm, A. Hornung, M. Bennewitz, C. Stachniss, and W. Burgard, “octoMap:
A probabilistic, ﬂexible, and compact 3D map representation for robotic system,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation (ICRA), 2010.
[44] 2013, retrieved June 10, 2013, http://gazebosim.org/.
[45] 2013, retrieved June 10, 2013, http://www.draganﬂy.com/.
[46] 2013, retrieved July 3, 2013,
http://www.ece.unb.ca/COBRA/quadrotor.htm.
38
[p.39]
Sajad Saeedi received his BEng in Electrical Engineering from K.N. Toosi
University of Technology in 2001. He received his M.Sc. from Tarbiat
Modares University in 2004, and his PhD from the University of New
Brunswick in 2014. His research interests include simultaneous localiza-
tion and mapping, multi-agent systems, intelligent systems, and nonlinear
control.
Amr Nagaty received his B.Sc. in Mechatronics Engineering from the
German University in Cairo in 2011. He also received his M.Sc. degree
in Electrical Engineering from the University of New Brunswick in 2014.
His research interests include: control theory, state estimation, vision and
unmanned systems.
Carl Thibault received his B.Sc. degree in mechanical engineering from
the University of New Brunswick in 2009. He received his M.Eng. degree
in Electrical Engineering from the same university in 2014. His interests
include unmanned vehicles systems, vertical take off and landing aircraft,
controls and application of robotics.
Michael Trentini received his B.Sc. degree in mechanical engineering
from Queens University in 1994, and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical en-
gineering from the University of Calgary in 1999. In 2003, he joined the
Autonomous Intelligent Systems Section at Defence Research and De-
velopment Canada, and in 2008 became the Group Head of the Complex
Controls Group. His current research interests include control systems theory for heli-
copter and quad-rotor ﬂight control systems and the control of unmanned systems that
combine control, vision, map building and path planning to navigate complex unstruc-
tured environments.
Howard Li is an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of New Brunswick, Canada. He re-
ceived his PhD from the University of Waterloo, Canada. He also worked
for Atlantis Systems International, Defence Research and Development
Canada, and Applied AI Systems Inc. to develop unmanned ground ve-
hicles, unmanned aerial vehicles, autonomous underwater vehicles, and mobile robots
for both domestic and military applications. He is a registered Professional Engineer
in the Province of Ontario, Canada. His research interests include linear control, non-
linear control, intelligent control, distributed control, unmanned vehicles, mechatron-
ics, robotics, multi-agent systems, artiﬁcial intelligence, motion planning, and simulta-
neous localisation and mapping.
39
=== END ===
