warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0242.pdf
sha256: 11FE407F3E2595BEBAAFCFEC53E2B67776CB4736507705115F0D484677AFA1DA
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 7
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
International conference on Signal Processing, Communication, Power and Embedded System (SCOPES)-2016
Survey on UAV Navigation in GPS Denied
Environments
Balamurugan G
School of Electronics Engineering,
VIT University, Vellore, India
Email: balamurugan.g2014@vit.ac.in
Valarmathi J
School of Electronics Engineering,
VIT University, Vellore, India
Email: jvalarmathi@vit.ac.in
VPS Naidu
MSDF Lab, FMCD, CSIR,
National Aerospace Laboratories,
Bangalore, India
Email: vpsnaidu@gmail.com
Abstract—In the Unmanned Air Vehicle (UAV) navigation
the main challenge is estimating and maintaining the accurate
values of UAVs position and orientation. The onboard Inertial
Measurement Unit (IMU) provide the measurements but it is
mainly affected from the accumulated error due to drift in
measurements. Traditionally the Global Position System (GPS)
measurements of vehicles position data can be fused with IMU
measurements to compensate the accumulated error, But the
GPS signals is not available everywhere and it will be degraded
or fully not available in hostile areas, building structures and
water bodies. Researchers already evolved methods to handle
the UAV navigation in GPS denied environment by using Vision
based navigation like Visual Odometry (VO) and Simultaneous
Localisation and Mapping (SLAM). In this survey paper we
attempted to understand the existing research towards vision
based navigation and ﬁnally proposed a Modular Multi-Sensor
Data Fusion technique for UAV navigation in the GPS denied
environment.
Keywords: Unmanned Air Vehicle (UAV), Inertial Measurement
Unit (IMU), Visual Odometry (VO), Simultaneous Localisation
and Mapping (SLAM)
I. INTRODUCTION
Unmanned Air Vehicle (UAV) is an upcoming technology
with great value to modernize the military applications and
facilitate innovative civilian applications. In the initial days the
UAVs were mostly utilized only for the military applications
like aerial reconnaissance. But recent days UAVs have seen a
dramatic increase in civilian uses like surveying the required
geographical area, collecting the images and required data
from remote areas, forest ﬁre monitoring and agriculture
information gathering [1].
Early Drones were controlled by human operator from the
ground station by radio unit. But the recent UAVs are more
sophisticated systems can ﬂy autonomously based on pre-
programmed ﬂight plans. Autonomous navigation of UAVs
uses onboard IMU. The IMU has three accelerometer and three
gyros to ﬁnd the linear movement and angular movement from
the starting point. But the IMU measurements will suffer with
accumulated error over time. Even the drift error is very small
it will accumulate to a large value over time. GPS location
information was used to compensate the IMU accumulated
error by fusing with IMU measurements.
In the real world scenario when the UAV will be ﬂying close
to vegetation, water bodies, hostile environment and inside
structures the GPS signals will be normally degraded or fully
absent. In the absence of GPS the navigation of Unmanned
Air Vehicle is very challenging because the navigation is fully
depend on inaccurate on-board IMU [2], [3].
To overcome the above mentioned difﬁculty of UAV naviga-
tion in GPS-denied environment, already different techniques
have been evolved by the researchers by using vision based
navigation
[4], [5]. In this survey paper we attempted to
analyse the already existing research on methods to get better
pose estimation of the navigating vehicle in the GPS denied
environment by fusing vision information with the IMU mea-
surements.
II. TECHNIQUES
The basic characteristic of IMU and Camera is perfectly
suitable to work with each other for providing accurate estima-
tion. IMUs are ideally chosen for navigation purpose, because
it can provide the measurement data at a higher sampling rate.
But over time IMU measurements are drifted and generate the
accumulated error. Vision sensor behaves in the other way,
the measurements are at low sampling rate due to the long
computation time for processing the captured image and the
measurement will not drift over time. By fusing vision and
inertial sensors provides a better pose estimation of the UAV.
In the vision based navigation approach the camera is
mounted on the UAV and the camera moves through its
surroundings and the motion of image features can be used
to ﬁnd the UAV trajectory. Most of the researchers follow the
following two techniques for this vision based approach,
- Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
- Visual Odometry
A. Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
SLAM incrementally builds a consistent live map of the
surrounding environment and estimates the pose of the vehicle
by the doing matching between this live map of vehicle
surrounding environment built with the currently captured
image. The SLAM problem structure, convergence result and
acronym SLAM was ﬁrst presented by H. Durrant-Whyte [6]
at the ISRR 1995. The advancement in SLAM helps the
vehicle to construct a live map of the surrounding environment
at the same time localize the vehicle by using the built map of
its environment. This localization technology helps the vehicle
to navigate autonomously in the remote environments. Vehicle
198
978-1-5090-4620-1/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
[p.2]
mounted with camera moving through the environment and
capturing the unknown image features can be seen in Figure
1 as provided by Hugh Durrant Whyte and Tim Bailey [7].
Fig. 1. Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping.
Where,
Xk = Vehicle state vector at time k.
Uk = Vehicle control vector to move to time k from k-1.
Mi = ith image feature location vector (The assumption is ith
image feature is static)
Zik = At time k, the ith image feature is observed from the
vehicle camera.
SLAM steps:
1. Assume vehicle initial position Xk−1 is the start with some
pre-existing image features in the map with high uncertainty
of the vehicle position.
2. When the vehicle starts moving from Xk−1 to Xk, motion
model provides new estimates of its new position and also
the uncertainty of its location increases.
3. During vehicle movement add new features Mi to the map
and update the existing feature measurement.
4. Compute the difference between the predicted observation
and the actual observation.
5. Update the estimate of the current state of vehicle.
B. Visual Odometry
Visual Odometry (VO) is a procedure of incrementally
estimate the position and orientation of the navigating vehicle
by analysing the deviation that the motion induced on the
sequence of images captured by the one or more onboard
cameras. The block diagram of VO is shown in Figure 2.
Fig. 2. Visual Odometry block diagram.
The VO computes the current position of the vehicle by
tracking the point features captured in the image plane. The
displacement is computed incrementally from the acquiring
image frames. The camera mounted UAV is ﬂying in the
environment and images are taken sequentially at every time
instant k as shown in Figure 3 as provided by Davide Scara-
muzza [8]. The successive images of UAV (Camera) positions
transformation is shown in equation 1,
Tk = [Rk,k−1tk,k−1; 0 1]
(1)
Where, R denotes rotation matrix and t represents the
translation vector.
The set of camera poses C0:n =[C0, ..., Cn] contains vehicle
camera transformations taken with respect to the frame taken
at instant k=0.The current pose Cn can be estimated by
integrating all the camera transformations Tk, k= 1...n,
Cn = Cn−1Tn
(2)
Fig. 3. Visual odometry Technique.
III. LITERATURE SURVEY
In the proceeding work, the research papers were analysed
which uses the SLAM or VO techniques for vision based
navigation of the vehicle when the GPS signal is degraded
or fully not available. Visual sensor like camera posses so
many advantages, mainly the cameras are less in weight and
require less power which makes it can be easily mounted on
the UAV. The camera in UAV can simultaneously support two
purposes. First, it can be used for visual surveillance of the
required geographical areas and second, it can be used for
estimating the pose of UAV in GPS denied environments.
Omead Amidi [9] designed Visual Odometry in the year
1996 is one among the ﬁrst researchers who proposes using
the vision data for estimating the unmanned vehicles position.
199
International conference on Signal Processing, Communication, Power and Embedded System (SCOPES)-2016
[p.3]
The VO was used for unmanned helicopter position estimation.
The odometer locks on to ground objects viewed by stereo
camera. By using high speed template matching of consecutive
images it estimates the helicopter position. The VO unit is
integrated with midsized Yamaha R50 helicopter for vision
guided autonomous ﬂight.
Bryce B Ready [2] presented a system for estimating the
Micro Air Vehicle (MAV) position using the Omead Amidi [9]
designed VO method for accurate position estimation. The
author used an Iterative registration Method of VO for UAV
pose estimation. The algorithm is veriﬁed by generated a
synthetic video and corrupted the true pose by adding Gaussian
noise. As well this was validated with MAV ﬂight data. The
result shows that GPS/INS measurement with VO has the
better performance with maximal standard deviation of around
2.5 meters against 5.6 meters deviation without VO.
Evan D. Anderson [4] claimed that the iterative registration
method proposed by Bryce B Ready [2] requires an extensive
computation time for pose estimate and proposed a new
method to do pose estimation with GPS/IMU data along
with camera data without the 3D location calculation. The
homography matrix is formed by combining the visual sensor
measurements and it has been provided as the measurement
variable input to the fusion. This is the ﬁrst proposed method
to use UKF to enable vision and IMU measurements data
Fusion. The algorithm is evaluated by the simulated data.
Clark N Taylor [3] has utilized the epipolar constraint based
UKF framework for fusing vision, IMU data air pressure sen-
sors. Epipolar constraint is used over SLAM-based technique
to achieve faster calculations by tracking features between
two frames. The following three main drawbacks of epipolar
constraint are addressed in this paper. 1. Bias introduced
when visual sensor moved towards the image point centre. 2.
Scale ambiguity in the camera measurement. 3. Visual sensor
navigation state is always estimated with its prior navigation
states.
Chaolei Wang [5] claims that Omead Amidi [9] design
of using stereo camera is successful in small UAVs, but
the distance and calibrating the stereo camera each time
before ﬂight is the biggest limitation and it also incur more
computational cost. Monocular camera provides good scala-
bility and accuracy and less calculation than stereo camera.
He suggested using other sensors like ultrasonic sensor or
barometric altimeter for measuring image features depth data.
Barometric altimeter measures the helicopter height and it is
also used in the Visual Odometry. The algorithm is veriﬁed
on the Test bed which is gas-powered radio-controlled model
helicopter integrated with required sensors like IMU, altimeter,
GPS and etc.
Chaolei Wang [10] also suggested to use monocular visual
SLAM for aerial vehicles pose estimation in the GPS degraded
environment. The estimate of the vehicle movement is done
using homography matrix. The EKF takes the visual SLAM
from monocular camera and IMU measurements and estimate
the pose of the UAV and build the real-time map of the
surrounding environment.
Dachuan Li [11] says that the when cameras and laser range
ﬁnders are used for position estimation of UAVs it basically
takes an assumptions about the structures and surrounding
environment. These assumptions limit the effectiveness of the
estimation in the 3D scenes. At the same time processing the
3D information required more computation power and time.
To overcome these issues the author proposed fusing the IMU
data with the RGBD sensor. The advantage of RGBD sensor is,
in addition it gives the depth information of the environment.
By EKF, the RGBD sensor (Microsoft Kinect is used) data
are combined with GPS/INS measurement. The algorithm is
veriﬁed in the indoor environment with the Kinect integrated
quadrotor and observed maximum deviation of approximately
8 cm.
S Rady [12] presented that the SLAM algorithms perform
very well when UAVs ﬂy in the indoor environment but it
is still a big challenge when the UAV ﬂy in the outdoor
environments. The author proposes utilizing the maps which
are pre-existing for UAV pose estimation. The construction of
the surrounding map is reduced with set of most informative
landmarks by information-theoretic. From the map only the
more informative ones are passed and less informative data
is ﬁltered out to provide more localization accuracy and less
computational requirement.
Justin M. Barrett [13] presented a navigation system for
unmanned vehicle which is hybrid in nature, it has on-board
stereo camera and INS to estimate the vehicle position and ori-
entation. The linear and angular movement of the autonomous
vehicle is differentiated by the image processing algorithm
which receives the inverse depth of the image features of the
scene from the stereo camera. The accumulated drift in the
IMU data need to be corrected to achieve accurate position
estimation of the vehicle. The author proposes Bayesian Infor-
mation Filter nothing but the EKF which fuses the camera data
with IMU data to correct the vehicle position drift introduced
by IMU. The algorithm is veriﬁed on the Husky A100 UGV.
Daniel Magree [17] proposed a navigation system for the
unmanned vehicle which integrates both the Visual SLAM
and Laser SLAM for achieving better pose estimation of
the vehicle. The purpose of visual SLAM and laser SLAM
integrated is even if one fails other will help in providing
robust pose estimation. Generally the laser based SLAM can
fail with ambiguous laser return proﬁles and the visual SLAM
can fail with inadequate or ambiguous image features in the
scene. These algorithms are veriﬁed individually in visual
SLAM and laser SLAM in the Georgia Tech UAV Simulation
Tool (GUST) and as well ﬂight tested on quad rotor.
Annett Chilian [14] proposed the Information ﬁlter for
fusing the IMU and Visual Odometry measurements to achieve
Better Pose Estimation The information ﬁlter is numerically
equivalent to the Kalman ﬁlter.
Andrew Chambers [15] suggested using screening gates be-
fore MSDF to create smooth estimate of the UAV position and
orientation. For better estimation, the measurements provided
to the MSDF have to be very accurate. The ﬁgure 4 shows
the overall ﬁlter design to achieve better pose estimation of
200
International conference on Signal Processing, Communication, Power and Embedded System (SCOPES)-2016
[p.4]
the UAV. In this, the measurement gating module will reject
the erroneous measurement from sensors which are above the
predeﬁned threshold value before fusing.
Fig. 4. Robust MSDF.
Davida Scaramuzza [16] provides the challenges faced
while executing the autonomous navigation project called
Swarm of Micro Flying Robots (SFLY). It is an European
project implemented and veriﬁed for a period of around three
years. These micro ﬂing robots can autonomously navigate in
GPS degraded environments. The major contributions in this
SFLY project are new hexacopter developed with computer
vision, SLAM based Navigation was developed. For global
navigation, maps from different MAVs were collected and
combined in the ofﬂine and position of the vehicle is calculated
by using adaptive optimization algorithm.
Gianpaolo Conte [18] utilized the available satellite images
in addition to Visual Odometry data to avoid the visual
odometry drift. In the proposed method he used the existing
satellite images as the reference images along with the real
time image from the onboard camera for the image registration
algorithm. With this vision aided method, visual odometry drift
will be avoided.
Duo-Yu Gu [19] proposed to use Geographic Information
System (GIS) for image aided UAV navigation. The limitations
like more storage requirement of scene matching and high
computation requirement of terrain matching are addressed in
this GIS using method. From the satellite images the important
feature points like bridges, road and rivers are extracted and
GIS model is prepared. Then the location of the UAV is
identiﬁed by the image registration method using the image
from onboard camera and the reference image from GIS
model.
Jay Farrell [20] provided a presentation for high degree of
accuracy required for vehicle navigation can be achieved by
fusing the information from IMU, GPS, camera and signals
of opportunity. The Signals of opportunity is nothing but the
RF signals from digital TV, digital radio and cellular. Since
these are opportunistic signals they are not synchronized with
receiver clock. But with time difference of arrival (TDOA)
techniques localization of vehicle can be achieved with this
asynchronous opportunistic signals [21].
IV. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
For the UAV navigation, vision aided approaches in the
GPS signal degraded/absence environment is analysed. In the
analysis of existing researches we noticed that most of the
implementations were using either Visual SLAM or Visual
Odometry, EKF with inertial data for better pose estimation
of UAV. The Visual SLAM algorithm is slower and need more
computation power and memory for building and maintaining
the live map of the features (landmarks) compare to Visual
Odometry.
In practical scenario with ﬂying UAV the processing time,
computation power and memory is the main constraint. In
the proposed approach by keeping these constraints we are
planning to use Visual Odometry along with GPS/IMU teleme-
try data. The Figure 5 provided after the TABLE 1 shows
the proposed architecture for UAV navigation in the GPS
degraded or denied environments. This is the modular MSDF
approach where we can add any required sensor in future to
get better pose estimation of the UAV without much change
in the architecture and code. The aim of this modular MSDF
approach is to accurately estimate UAV pose which may be
represented interms of three dimensional location (x,y and z)
and orientation (pitch, yaw and roll).
In the proposed design the screening gate is used to val-
idate(accept/reject) the actual GPS measurement based on
the threshold. This screening gate will make sure only the
undegraded GPS data will be passed on to fusion algorithm.
Before fusing the measurements from the IMU and VO,
the ﬁrst stage is to do the required preprocessing of the
measurements. The IMU measurements have deterministic and
dynamic errors like bias and scale factor errors. The error
compensation block in the MSDF ﬁrst remove the biases
and correct the scale factors before fusion. As well the pose
estimation from Visual Odometry needs to be translated to
E- Frame before fusion. The E- frame is Earth-centred earth
ﬁxed frame which resolved earth rotation with respect to I-
Frame. Generally if the measurements from the sensors are
linear functions and affected by only Gaussian noise then
we can use the Kalman ﬁlter approach. But in our UAV
navigation application linearity assumption will not hold well,
so we need to use Extended Kalman ﬁltering to fuse the
measurements. EKF is based on approximation of the Bayes
rule using linearization.
For EKF, the measurements from the GPS and IMU mod-
ules are considered as the ﬁlter state observed value and these
measurements are the pose vector current true value. The Vi-
sual Odometry will provide the pose estimate to MSDF which
is non linear with respect to previous pose estimate. EKF
calculates the Visual Odometry based present pose estimate
with known previous pose estimate.
V. COMPARISON STUDY
In this survey we have done the study on the existing
methods of Unmanned Vehicle navigation in the GPS denied
Environments. The survey reveals that most of the methods
using either monocular Camera or stereo camera along with
IMU to do the pose estimation in the GPS degraded environ-
ments. With this extensive study on this topic we prepared the
comparison summary as shown in TABLE 1.
201
International conference on Signal Processing, Communication, Power and Embedded System (SCOPES)-2016
[p.5]
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF VISUAL NAVIGATION STUDIES IN THE GPS DENIED ENVIRONMENTS
Sl.No
Type of Vehicle
Strategy
Sensors Used
Year
References
1
AscTec Pelican Quadrotor
Visual Odometry
Stereo Camera
2015
[26]
2
Quadrotor(GTQ)
Visual SLAM and Laser SLAM with EKF
IMU,
Sonar,
Scanning
Laser and camera
2014
[17]
3
Hexacopter
Visual SLAM with EKF
IMU, Monocular Camera
2014
[16]
4
Mikrokopter
EKF
IMU, monocular Camera,
GPS, Barometric altimeter
2014
[15]
5
six wheeled UGV
Bayesian Information ﬁlter (EKF)
IMU and Stereo Camera
2013
[13]
6
AscTec Pelican MAV
VO and SLAM
Stereo Camera
2013
[27]
7
Simulator with ﬂight data
UKF
IMU, GPS and Camera
2013
[34]
8
Quadrotor
Invariant EKF
IMU and RGBD Odome-
try(Kinect)
2013
[11]
9
Asctec Pelican Quadrotor
UKF
IMU, Monocular Camera
2013
[24]
10
AscTec Fireﬂy MAV
EKF
IMU, Pressure Sensor and
Monocular camera
2013
[25]
11
Quadrotor
Visual SLAM with KF
IMU
with
monocular
camera
2013
[22]
12
Hexacopter
Visual SLAM with EKF
IMU and WVGA monoc-
ular Camera
2012
[29]
13
Simulator with data
EKF
IMU, Monocular Camera
2012
[23]
14
Multi-Stereo Helmet tracking
system
EKF
IMU
and
Monocular
Camera
2012
[35]
15
Test bed which is gas powered
radio controlled model heli-
copter
Visual SLAM with EKF
IMU, Monocular Camera
2012
[10]
16
Quadrocopter
Visual SLAM with EKF
IMU,
Pressure
Sensor,
USB
Fireﬂy
monocular
camera
2011
[28]
17
Gas-powered radio-controlled
model helicopter
Visual Odometry with EKF
IMU, Monocular Camera
2011
[5]
18
Scout B1-100 Helicopter
Using Pre-Existing Maps
IMU
and
Monocular
Camera
2011
[12]
19
Six Legged Crawler
Visual Odometry
IMU with Stereo Camera
2011
[14]
20
Simulator with Flight Data
Image Registration using GIS Data
IMU, GPS, Camera and
GIS Data
2010
[19]
21
Simulator with ﬂight data
Visual SLAM
Camera
2010
[38]
22
Quadrotor
Visual SLAM with EKF
IMU,
Stereo
camera,
Monocular color camera
with Laser ﬁnder
2010
[32]
23
HMAV
EKF
IMU and Wi-Fi Camera
2009
[30]
24
Quadcopter
KF
IMU and VGA Camera
2009
[31]
25
Yamaha RMAX Helicopter
KF with Image Registration
IMU, GPS, Camera and
Satellite Images
2008
[18]
26
Simulator with Vehicle data
Kalman Filter
IMU with Laser scanner
2008
[37]
27
Simulator with synthetic MAV
ﬂight data
UKF framework utilizing epiopolar constraint
IMU and Stereo Camera
2008
[3]
28
Simulator
with
MAV
ﬂight
data
Iterative Registration method, UKF
IMU
with
monocular
camera
2007
[4]
29
Simulator
with
MAV
ﬂight
data.
Visual Odometry with EKF
IMU
with
monocular
camera
2007
[2]
30
Acrobatic 23cc helicopter
Non Linear observer
IMU and Webcam
2007
[33]
31
Simulator with Vehicle data
EKF
IMU with Camera
2007
[36]
202
International conference on Signal Processing, Communication, Power and Embedded System (SCOPES)-2016
[p.6]
Fig. 5. Modular Multi Sensor Data Fusion for UAV Navigation.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this survey paper we presented the different techniques
used by the existing researchers for the UAV navigation in
the GPS denied environment using vision based navigation.
A comparison study chart has been prepared and listed in
the Table 1. Based on our survey we found that the Visual
Odometry based approach will be faster and required less
memory and computational power compare to SLAM. In
Section IV we proposed modular Multi Sensor Data Fusion
approach for UAV navigation with better pose estimation in
the GPS denied environment.
REFERENCES
[1] Ping J.T.K Generic unmanned aerial Vehicle for Civilian application
A feasibility assessment and market survey on civilian application for
aerial imaging IEEE Conference Kuala Lumpur 2012.
[2] Bryce B. Ready and Clark N. Taylor, Improving Accuracy of MAV Pose
Estimation using Visual Odometry in Proceedings of the 2007 American
Control Conference Marriott Marquis Hotel at Times Square New York
City, USA, July 11-13, 2007.
[3] Clark N Taylor, Fusion of Inertial, Vision and Air Pressure Sensors
for MAV Navigation in IEEE International Conference on Multisensor
Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Systems Seoul, Korea, Aug 2008.
[4] Evan D. Andersen and Clark N. Taylor, Improving MAV Pose Estima-
tion Using Visual Information in Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems San Diego,
CA, USA, Oct 29 - Nov 2, 2007.
[5] Chaolei Wang, Tianmiao Wang, Jianhong Liang, Yang Chen, Yongliang
Wu Monocular Vision and IMU Based Navigation for a Small Un-
manned helicopter in IEEE conference on Industrial Electronics and
Applications 2012.
[6] H. Durrant-Whyte, D. Rye, and E. Nebot. Localisation of auto- matic
guided vehicles. In G. Giralt and G. Hirzinger, editors, Ro-botics
Research: The 7th International Symposium (ISRR95) pages 613-625
Springere Verlag 1996.
[7] Hugh Durrant Whyte and Tim Bailey ”Simultaneous Localisation and
Mapping : Part I The Essential Algorithms” in Australian Centre for
Field Robotics (ACFR) J04, The University of Sydney, Sydney NSW
2006, Australia,
[8] Davide Scaramuzza and Friedrich Fraundorfer ”Visual Odometry Tuto-
rial” in IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine in Decemeber 2011.
[9] O Amidi, An Autonomous Vision-Guided Helicopter School of Com-
puter Science, Robotics Institute. Page 22, 1996.
[10] Chaolei Wang, Tianmiao Wang, Jianhong Liang, Yang Chen, Yicheng
Zhang and Cong Wang
Monocular Visual SLAM for Small UAVs
in GPS-denied Environments in IEEE conference on Robotics and
Biomimetics 2012.
[11] Dachuan Li, Qing Li, Nong Cheng, Qinfan Wu, Jingyan Song Combined
RGBD Inertial based State Estimation for MAV in GPS-denied Indoor
Environments in IEEE conference on Aviation Science Foundation of
China 2013.
[12] S Rady, A A Kandil, E Badreddin
A Hybrid Localization Approach
for UAV in GPS denied Areas in IEEE Conference on SI International
2011.
[13] Justin M. Barrett, Michael A Gennert, William R Michalson Devel-
opment of a Low-Cost, Self Contained Combined Vision and Inertial
Navigation System in IEEE Conference 2013.
[14] Annett Chilian, Heiko Hirschmuller, Martin Gorner Multi-sensor Data
Fusion for Robust Pose Estimation of a Six-Legged Walking Robot
in 2011 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems September 25-30,2011. San Francisco, CA, USA.
[15] Andrew Chambers, Sebastian Scherer, Luke Yoder, Sezal Jain Stephen
Nuske, Sanjiv Singh Robust Multi-Sensor Fusion for Micro Aerial
Vehicle Navigation in GPS-Degraded/Denied Environments.
[16] Davide Scaramuzza and other Authors Vision Controlled Micro Flying
Robots in IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION MAGAZINE page
26-40.Sep 2014.
[17] Daniel Magree, Eric N Johnson Combined Laser and Vision aided
203
International conference on Signal Processing, Communication, Power and Embedded System (SCOPES)-2016
[p.7]
Inertial Navigation for an Indoor Unmanned Aerial Vehicle in American
Control Conference 2014.
[18] Gianpaolo Conte and Patrick Doherty, An Integrated UAV Navigation
System Based on Aerial Image Matching in IEEEAC Paper No 1276,
Version I Updated 23/10/2007.
[19] Duo-Yu Gu, Cheng-Fei Zhu, Jiang Guo, Shu-Xiao Li, and Hong-
Xing Chang, Vision-Aided UAV Navigation using GIS Data in IEEE
International Conference on Vehicular Electronics and Safety 2010.
[20] Jay Farrell, Innovative Approaches for Next Generation Vehicle Position-
ing in US Federal Highway Administration Workshop Summary report
Nov 2012.
[21] Angelo Coluccia, Fabio Ricciato and Giuseppe Ricci, Positioning Based
on Signals of Opportunity article in IEEE Communications letters Feb
2014.
[22] Inkyu Sa, Hu He,Van Huynh, Peter Corke Monocular Vision based
Autonomous Navigation for a Cost-Effective MAV in GPS-denied
Environments in IEEE conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics
(AIM) July 2013.
[23] Farhad Samadzadegan, Ghasem Abdi Autonomous Navigation of Un-
manned Aerial Vehicles Based on Multi-Sensor Data Fusion in IEEE
Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE2012) May 2012.
[24] Raﬁk Mebarki, Jonathan Cacace, Vincenzo Lippiello Velocity estimation
of an UAV using visual and IMU data in a GPS-denied environment in
IEEE conference 2013.
[25] Simon Lynen, Markus W. Achtelik, Stephan Weiss, Margarita Chli and
Roland Siegwart A Robust and Modular Multi-Sensor Fusion Approach
Applied to MAV Navigation in IEEE International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) November 2013.
[26] Changhong Fu, Adrian Carrio Efﬁcient Visual Odometry and Mapping
for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Using ARM-based Stereo Vision Pre-
Processing System in IEEE International Conference on Unmanned
Aircraft Systems (ICUAS) June 2015.
[27] Martial Sanfourche Vincent Vittori and Guy Le Besnerais eVO: a
real time embedded stereo odometry for MAV applications in IEEE
International conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems Nov 2013.
[28] Markus Achtelik, Michael Achtelik, Stephan Weiss, Roland Siegwart
Onboard IMU and Monocular Vision Based Control for MAVs in Un-
known In- and Outdoor Environments in IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, May 2011.
[29] Stephan Weiss, Markus W. Achtelik, Simon Lynen, Margarita Chli,
Roland Siegwart Real-time Onboard Visual-Inertial State Estimation
and Self-Calibration of MAVs in Unknown Environments in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation. May 2012
[30] Spencer Ahrens, Daniel Levine, Gregory Andrews and Jonathan P
How Vision-Based Guidance and Control of a Hovering Vehicle in
Unknown, GPS-denied Environments in IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation. May 2009.
[31] Markus Achtelik, Tianguang Zhang, Kolja Kuhnlenz and Martin Buss
Visual Tracking and Control of a Quadcopter Using a Stereo Camera
System and Inertial Sensors in IEEE International Conference on Mecha-
tronics and Automation. August 2012.
[32] Abraham Bachrach, Anton de Winter, Fuijie He, Garrett Hemann,
Samuel Prentice, Nicholas Roy RANGE - Robust Autonomous Navi-
gation in GPS-denied Environments in IEEE IEEE International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation. May 2010.
[33] T Cheviron, T Hamel, R Mahony, G Baldwin Robust Nonlinear Fusion
of Inertial and Visual Data for Position, Velocity and attitude estimation
of UAV in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
2007.
[34] CesarioVincenzoAngelino, Vincenzo Rosario Baraniello, Luca Cicala
High Altitude UAV Navigation using IMU, GPS and Camera in In-
ternational Conference on Information Fusion. 2013.
[35] Taragay Oskiper, Supun Samarasekera, Rakesh Kumar Multi-Sensor
Navigation Algorithm Using Monocular Camera, IMU and GPS for
Large Scale Augmented Reality in IEEE International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented reality 2012
[36] Anastasios I Mourikis and Stergios I Roumeliotis A Multi-State Con-
straint Kalman Filter for Vision aided Inertial Navigation in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation 2007.
[37] Andrey Soloviev Tight Coupling of GPS, Laser Scanner and Inertial
Measurements for Navigation in Urban Environments in IEEE 2008.
[38] M K Kaizer, N R Gans, W E Dixon Vision Based Estimation for Guid-
ance, Navigation, and Control of an Aerial Vehicle in IEEE Transactions
on Aerospace and Electronic Systems Page 1064-1077.July2010.
204
International conference on Signal Processing, Communication, Power and Embedded System (SCOPES)-2016
=== END ===
