warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0255.pdf
sha256: BB4D13AA3A97B9928DF6137EA4EDA78726431C925085E870F0899935CE492648
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 6
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
A Stereo and Rotating Laser Framework for UAV Navigation 
in GPS Denied Environment 
Hailong Qin§, Yingcai Bit, Kevin Z. Y. Ang*, Kangli Wang+, Jiaxin Lit, Menglu Lant, Mo Shan*, F. Lin* 
*Temasek Laboratories, National University of Singapore 
tNUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences & Engineering, National University of Singapore 
:Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore 
§Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore 
Abstract-Recent developments in robotics sensing 
using either the active sensor-laser range finder (LRF) 
or passive sensors-camera systems have shown that the 
existing approaches are able to estimate the motion and 
reconstruct the environment in a typical GPS-denied 
environment such as indoor environments. However, 
for a 2D LRF, it can only provide a planar measurement 
due to the hardware limitations and the cost for 3D 
LRF is still too high for robotic systems. For camera 
systems, the 3D perception capability and lightweight 
are promising while it is not effective in long range, 
low illumination and low textured environment com­
pared to the LRF. In the proposed framework, our 
first contribution is a senor integration system that 
combines a stereo camera with a rotating LRF. The 
stereo camera can achieve a fast and smooth motion 
estimation and the rotating LRF could construct a 
dense 3D environment. Our second contribution is an 
integration of a fast feature-based motion estimation 
with an accurate shape matching refinement. The pro­
posed approaches have been built in our customized 
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) platform. 
We have 
verified our proposed approach through a series of 
extensive evaluations in clustered indoor environments 
and open outdoor environments. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Robotics navigation in GPS-denied has been ex­
tensively studied in the past decades and shown 
promising results. Consider the LRF based ap­
proaches, Diosi et al.[I] achieves a point to point 
matching in polar coordinates to obtain a fast pla­
nar motion estimation for mobile robots. Apparent­
ly, the proposed similar approaches are not the first 
choice for UAV applications since it is not a full 
degree of freedom (DoF) motion estimation. To solve 
this issue, Kohlbrecher et al.[2] proposes a sensor 
integration framework that combines the motion 
estimation result from a LRF using scan to map 
matching together with a height sensor and inertial 
measurement unit (IMU). The proposed framework 
has been widely adopted [3], yet the constructed 
2D map further limits the UAV's mobility in 3D 
space. This space limitation leads to the study of 
3D LRF based approaches [4] while the weight and 
cost prevent the further application on UAVs. 
Compared with LRF-based approaches, camera 
systems are competitive alternatives owing to its 
978-1-5090-3474-1/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE 
6061 
light-weight and low-cost. More importantly, the 
camera systems naturally contains more informa­
tion than the 2D LRF system. Klein's milestone 
framework [5] successfully estimates the 6DoF mo­
tion of a monocular camera and reconstructs a 
sparse feature map. The usage of monocular camera 
can only provide an up-to-scale motion estimation. 
Therefore, it can not be directly applied it on the 
UAV. To extend this work, Weiss et al. [6] integrates 
the monocular camera system with an onboard 
IMU in an Extend Kalman filter (EKF) framework 
to recover the absolute scale. This work has been 
demonstrated on UAV platform for outdoor flight. 
However, for clustered environment such as an 
indoor office and outdoor forest, a precise map 
is critical to the motion planning of UAVs. Be­
sides the monocular camera, stereo camera-based 
navigation can provide an absolute scale with a 
known baseline. The difference in baseline leads 
to either long time correspondence searching or 
long distance depth estimation error [7]. The recent 
achievements in stereo camera based simultaneous 
localization and mapping (stereo-SLAM) are stereo 
LSD-SLAM [8] and stereo ORB-SLAM [9]. The stereo 
LSD-SLAM applies direct approach [10] to align 
images and estimate motion. Different from the 
stereo LSD SLAM, the stereo ORB-SLAM adopt the 
sparse feature alignment approach. However, all of 
these two are based on the parallel tracking and 
mapping framework [5] so that the relocalization 
[11] is required once the tracking is lost. 
To address the above challenges, a robust and ef­
ficient stereo-rotating laser framework is developed 
with the following contributions. 
• A keyframe based stereo depth initialization and 
odometry. 
• A customized rotating laser device that can 
project the 2D LRF into a 3D point cloud. 
• A stereo-rotating laser framework which can 
provide a coarse to fine motion estimation; 
• A rotating laser mapping system to create a 
consistent 3D map for UAV motion plannning; 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
II. PLATFORM 
A. Hardware setup 
The quadrotor is customized to have a 128 cm 
from tip to tip and a maximum 5 kg takeoff weight 
with 2 kg payload. The customized flight control 
algorithm is built in the Pixhawk flight controller 
[12]. The stereo camera has a baseline of 120 mm 
and is mounted in front of the UAV platform to 
estimate the motion and the customized rotating 
laser device is mounted on top of the stereo camera 
to refine the motion estimation and reconstruct the 
environment. Fig. 1. shows the full configuration of 
the platform. 
" 
/. 
Fig. 1: The quadrotor. 
B. Terminology and notation 
In the proposed framework, the body frame of UAV 
platform is defined as U, the stereo coordinate as 
S and local laser coordinate as L. For the rotating 
laser device, one rotation of the laser range finder 
is from -900 to 900 in CW or 900 to -900 in CCW 
as denoted (8) in Fig. 2 while the x-y plane is the 
00 planar plane. Thus for kth rotation, the laser 
coordinate is expressed as Lk• The world coordinate 
is w as described in Fig. 
3. For a 3D point X in 
kth keyframe, the coordinate is expressed as Xr, 
Xf and Xp correspondingly. 
' 
z 
()
..... 
... 
x 
Fig. 2: Rotating angle illustration in front view. 
6062 
z 
Jv.y 
X 
Fig. 3: The coordinates illustration. 
III. OVERVIEW OF METHOD 
The proposed stereo and rotating laser framework 
starts with an automatic initialization which tri­
angulates the matched feature points from static 
stereo image pair into an empty 3D map. After 
initialization, the UAV pose is estimated by mini­
mizing the reprojection error between the current 
feature points and the initialized map. Different 
from current state-of-the-art tracking and mapping 
framework [5] [9], the initialized sparse feature map 
will only be used for a short period without adding 
new points until there are not enough inliers in the 
initialized map. We propose this approach since a 
smooth initialization is critical to the rotating laser's 
mapping thread. Once the initialization is complet­
ed, instead of spending extra effort to maintain a 
sparse feature based mapping thread, the rotating 
laser is utilized to create dense 3D map and refine 
the motion estimation from pure stereo odometry 
based motion estimation. To summarize, we can 
separate the proposed approach into two threads: 
motion estimation and mapping. The details for the 
proposed method are listed below. 
A. Motion estimation 
The motion estimation thread contains the follow­
ing four steps sequentially. The proposed motion 
estimation thread can be summarized as follOwing 
Fig. 4. 
1) Feature extraction: Select feasible feature de­
tector and deSCriptor for feature matching and 
sparse map initialization is a fundamental 
step in our framework. The famous feature 
like SIFT and SURF are scale invariant [13] 
[14]. However, the extraction time for those 
features are around 300m3 which cannot meet 
our realtime requirement. Other potential fea­
tures such as BRIEF [IS] are not rotation 
invariant. The ORB (Oriented FAST and Ro­
tated BRIEF)feature [16] is a fusion of FAST 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
ORB feature 
Left image 
extraction 
______ _ 
Minimize 
&matching Initialized sparse 
feature map 
reprojection 
Right 
image 
error (BA) 
1-----+1 Camera pose 
Keyframe 
Fig. 4: Motion estimation framework. 
and BRIEF which uses pyramid to generate 
multiscale representations. The computational 
speed and scale invariant capability(to some 
extent) have been demonstrated in several 
works [17] [9]. Here, we select the ORB fea­
ture for sparse feature point representation in 
stereo image pairs. A feature detection for typ­
ical indoor environment is shown in follOwing 
Fig. 5 
Fig. 5: ORB feature detection in indoor environment 
2) Automatic map initialization: The sparse fea­
ture map is initialized by searching correspon­
dence in static stereo image pair and triangu­
lating the matched feature points with known 
baseline. Owing to the pre-rectity process, the 
images are undistorted with known intrinsic 
parameters. During this process, each input 
frame is separated into a grid format at each 
pyramid scale for the purpose of a homoge­
neous feature distribution. The matching score 
is computed based on the obtained ORB de­
scriptor. The input frame is selected as the 
initial keyframe once a good initialization is 
achieved. The initialized sparse map is denoted 
6063 
as Mw. 
3) Existing map tracking: Once the initialization 
is completed, the initial map will be keep u­
tilized for motion estimation in a short peri­
od(depends on the view variation). This step 
seems to be redundant, yet it can guarantee 
a smooth initialization of the rotating laser 
mapping thread. The tracking is based on 
minimization of the reprojection error, for a 3D 
point XW,j in Mw the reprojection error for the 
point in the keyframe Ki can be represented as 
follOwing equation [18]: 
e· . = x· . - Jr·(Tw Xw·) 
'[ ,J 
'[ ,) 
1, 
,[
,
 
,J 
(1) 
where TiWESE(3) is the current stereo cam­
era pose with respect to the world coordinate 
and Jri is the projection function with known 
parameters. Therefore, the cost function to be 
minimized is 
E(TiW) = L eAijeij 
ij 
(2) 
where Aij is the inverse covariance of the 
feature measurement. Here, only the stereo 
camera pose is optimized. To solve this equa­
tion, we adopt the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) 
method in g20 framework [19]. 
4) Keyframe selection: The keyframe-based ap­
proach can help to reject redundant frames 
so that the framework is more compact and 
reduce the matching errors [20] [5] [9]. The 
selection of keyframe Ki should meet the fol­
lowing requirements: 
a) In the existing map tracking phase, the 
selected frame Ki should have enough 
inliers for motion estimation in 1V1w. 
b) The selected frame Ki should have less in 
common compared with Ki-1• 
c) Between Ki and Ki-1, there should be 
certain number of frames. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
5) Model based motion estimation: If there are 
not enough inliers for the current keyframe Ki 
in Mw then the existing map tracking stop­
s. For the upcoming selected keyframes, the 
motion estimation is a standard PnP problem 
instead of a map tracking [21]. We apply a 
constant velocity model for the stereo camera 
motion to increase the speed of convergence 
[22]. The motion estimation calculated from 
this step cannot be consistent and accurate 
compare with the existing map tracking. How­
ever, it is fast and smooth enough for the 
rotating mapping thread to refine the motion 
and construct the map. 
B. Rotating laser mapping 
Using a rotating laser to create a dense 3D map 
instead of the stereo camera alone has the follOwing 
advantages: (1) the laser itself can provide a precise 
measurement about the surrounding environment. 
(2) the laser has a long sensing range which can 
be helpful to the path planning. Several works have 
been established using the rotating laser approach, 
Zhang et al. [23] uses a single rotating laser to 
achieve motion estimation and mapping. However, 
the motion speed is limited since the correspon­
dence between laser scan should be established 
through a time sequence matching. To improve 
the result, a monocular camera together a single 
rotating laser is established [24]. Different from 
our framework, the scale of camera needs to be 
recovered from the laser. Kaul et al. [25] develops 
a passive rotating mechanism for laser, yet a initial 
motion guess is needed from GPS. In our proposed 
framework the initial motion is obtained from the 
above motion estimation part which is faster and 
more consistent when compared with GPS measure­
ment and the proposed framework is still effective in 
indoor GPS-denied environment. The rotating laser 
mapping thread has the follOwing conditions: 
1) Static UAV with rotating laser mapping: The 
20 LRF measurement will be projected into 3D 
space with the known rotating angle e. The 
point cloud set accumulated in ith rotation 
is defined as V; L in the laser coordinate as 
illustrate by Fig. 6 
Fig. 6: Static UAV with rotating laser mapping. 
6064 
Fig. 7: Motion estimation update topology. 
2) Moving UAV with rotating laser mapping: Once 
the UAV moves, a coarse motion estimation 
can be obtained from above motion estima­
tion thread. If only the coarse estimation is 
applied, the rotating laser mapping can on­
ly generate an inconsistent map. To refine 
the motion estimation result and obtain an 
complete point cloud-based map, we adopt a 
3D Iep approach. The existing problem with 
traditional Iep is that a good initial motion 
estimation should be given for a fast and ac­
curate convergence. Otherwise, the Iep based 
motion estimation process will diverge. Since 
we already obtain a fast and smooth mo­
tion estimation through stereo camera based­
motion estimation, we can further update the 
motion estimation result and incrementally 
build the map using the Iep approach and the 
coarse estimation will be used as initial guess 
of Iep. Here we adopted the libpointmatcher 
[26] developed by ASL-ETH, which is an open 
source library for Iep algorithm. The topology 
is shown in Fig. 
7 to illustrate the update 
process. 
Where the Tii-1 and TZ+1 are the updated trans­
formation relationship. Based on the above 
method, an accumulated point cloud is shown 
in Fig. 8 for a typical indoor environment. 
IV. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS 
To verifY the proposed methodology, a series of 
experiments have been conducted. Since the open 
dataset is not available which contains the stereo 
image pairs together with rotating 20 LRF, two 
experiments have been designed to compare the 
accuracy between the coarse estimation from stereo 
vision with the refined result from rotating laser 
mapping. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
( a) 
(b) 
Fig. 8: Front view of point cloud for indoor environment. 
A. Clustered indoor environment test 
The clustered indoor environment is a typical 
GPS-denied environment which requires a sensing 
approach to estimate the ego motion of the UAV 
and a mapping approach for path planning. In our 
proposed framework, the coarse to fine step esti­
mates the motion of the UAV in indoor environment 
and reconstructed a dense point cloud map using 
rotating laser. A reconstructed indoor environment 
is shown in Fig. 9. 
( a) 
(b) 
Fig. 9: Reconstructed indoor environment. 
B. Outdoor environment test 
One of the advantages for our system is that it 
can work both in indoor and outdoor environment. 
We demonstrate our framework in a typical outdoor 
scenario, which is a lobby in front of our lab. 
The images in Fig. 10 show the environment and 
reconstructed result. Since we use the rotating laser 
scanner, the reconstructed range is up to 30 meters. 
C. Comparison 
A comparison of stereo camera based motion 
estimation between stereo-laser combined motion 
estimation is shown in Fig. 11. According to the 
reconstructed environment, the rotating laser based 
mapping thread optimize the motion estimation in­
put from the stereo camera based motion estima­
tion. We further test our system by walking through 
a long distance corridor and building a consistent 
3D map of the corridor (shown in Fig. 12). The 
6065 
( a) 
(b) 
Fig. 10: Reconstructed outdoor environment. 
-stereoase!bawdnl<llooeslmatJ::.n 
-stereobasedmotrnsrnallJl 
Fig. 11: Comparison of motion estimation result 
distance of the reconstructed corridor is more than 
40 meters with a 90 degree turning. We can see from 
the mapping result that the turning angle is strictly 
around 90 degree and the wall is straight enough, 
meaning there is no obvious drift in our system. 
Furthermore, the system gives many details for the 
environment. We can see the cubic and desks beside 
the wall. Comparing to the vision only mapping 
system, our system contains less noise point thanks 
to the accuracy of laser scanner. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we propose a stereo and rotating 
laser system for the navigation purpose in GPS 
denied environment. Comparing to the vision only 
system, we take advantage of the accuracy of laser 
scanner. Comparing to the laser only system, we 
design the rotating mechanism to build 3D map 
with the help of high frequency vision tracking 
method. The proposed system is fast, accurate and 
robust. We will apply this system to accomplish the 
autonomous flight in cluttered environment in the 
further work. 
REFERENCES 
III A. Diosi and L. Kleeman. "Laser scan matching in polar co­
ordinates with application to slam. " in InteUigent Robots and 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
Fig. 12: Reconstructed dense map of long distance corridor 
Systems. 2005.(IROS 2005). 2005 IEEEIRSJ International 
Conference on. 
IEEE. 2005, pp. 3317-3322. 
[2[ S. Kohlbrecher, O. Von Stryk, J. Meyer, and U. Klingauf, 
"A flexible and scalable slam system with full 3d motion 
estimation," in Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR), 
2011 IEEE International Symposium on. 
IEEE, 2011, pp. 
155-160. 
[3[ J. Fossel, D. Hennes, D. Claes, S. Alers, and K. Tuyls, "Oc­
to slam: A 3d mapping approach to situational awareness of 
unmanned aerial vehicles," in Unmanned Aircrajt Systems 
(ICUAS), 2013 International Conference on. 
IEEE, 2013, pp. 
179-188. 
[4[ D. M. Cole and P. M. Newman, "Using laser range data for 
3d slam in outdoor environments," in Robotics and Automa­
tion, 2006. ICRA 2006. Proceedings 2006 IEEE International 
Conjerence on. 
IEEE, 2006, pp. 1556-1563. 
[5[ G. Klein and D. Murray, "Parallel tracking and mapping 
for small ar workspaces," in Mixed and Augmented ReaUty, 
2007. ISMAR 2007. 6th IEEE and ACM International Sympo­
sium on. 
IEEE, 2007, pp. 225-234. 
[6[ S. Weiss, M. W. Achtelik, S. Lynen, M. Chli, and R. Siegwart, 
"Real-time onboard visual-inertial state estimation and self­
calibration of mavs in unknown environments," in Robotics 
and Automation (ICRA), 2012 IEEE International Conference 
on. 
IEEE, 2012, pp. 957-964. 
[7] H. Herath, S. Kodagoda, and G. Dissanayake, Stereo vision 
based SLAM: Issues and solutions. 
ITECH, 2007. 
[8] J. Engel, J. Stuckler, and D. Cremers, "Large-scale direct 
slam with stereo cameras," in Intettigent Robots and Systems 
(IROS), 2015 IEEEIRSJ International Conference on. 
IEEE, 
2015, pp. 1935-1942. 
[9] R. Mur-Artal, J. Montiel, and J. D. Tardos, "Orb-slam: a 
versatile and accurate monocular slam system," Robotics, 
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1147-1163,2015. 
[10] J. Engel, T. Schops, and D. Cremers, "Lsd-slam: Large-scale 
direct monocular slam," in Computer Vision-ECCV 2014. 
Springer, 2014, pp. 834-849. 
[11] B. Williams, G. Klein, and I. Reid, "Real-time slam relocal­
isation," in Computer Vision, 2007. ICCV 2007. IEEE 11th 
International Conference on. 
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1-8. 
[12] L. Meier, P. Tanskanen, L. Heng, G. H. Lee, F. Fraundorfer, 
and M. Pollefeys, "Pixhawk: A micro aerial vehicle design 
for autonomous flight using onboard computer viSion," 
Autonomous Robots, vol. 33, no. 1-2, pp. 21-39, 2012. 
[13] D. G. Lowe, "Distinctive image features from scale-invariant 
keypoints," Internationa[journal of computer vision, vol. 60, 
no. 2,pp. 91-110, 2004. 
[14] H. Bay, T. Tuytelaars, and L. Van Gool, "Surf: Speeded up 
robust features," in Computer vision-ECCV 2006. 
Springer, 
2006, pp. 404-417. 
[15] M. Calonder, V. Lepetit, C. Strecha, and P. Fua, "Brief: 
Binary robust independent elementary features," Computer 
Vision-ECCV 2010, pp. 778-792, 2010. 
[16] E. Rublee, V. Rabaud, K. Konolige, and G. Bradski, "Orb: 
an efficient alternative to sift or surf," in Computer Vision 
6066 
(ICCV), 2011 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2011, 
pp. 2564-2571. 
[17] J. Xu, H. -w. Chang, S. Yang, and M. Wang, "Fast feature­
based video stabilization without accumulative global mo­
tion estimation," Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions 
on, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 993-999, 2012. 
[18] K. Konolige and W. Garage, "Sparse sparse bundle adjust­
ment. " 
Citeseer. 
[19] R. Kummerle, G. Grisetti, H. Strasdat, K. Konolige, and 
W. Burgard, "g 2 0: A general framework for graph opti­
mization," in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2011 IEEE 
International Conference on. 
IEEE, 2011. pp. 3607-3613. 
[20] S. Leutenegger, S. Lynen, M. Bosse, R. Siegwart, and P. Fur­
gale, "Keyframe-based visual-inertial odometry using non­
linear optimization," The International Journal Qf Robotics 
Research. vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 314-334, 2015. 
[21] V. Lepetit, F. Moreno-Noguer, and P. Fua, "Epnp: An accu­
rate 0 (nl solution to the pnp problem," Internationatjournal 
of computer vision, vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 155-166,2009. 
[22] T. Pire, T. Fischer, J. Civera, P. De Crist6foris, and J. Ja­
cobo berlles, "Stereo Parallel Tracking and Mapping for 
robot localization," in Proc. QfThe International Conference 
on InteWgent Robots and Systems (IROS) (Accepted), 2015. 
[23] J. Zhang and S. Singh, "Loam: Lidar odometry and mapping 
in real-time. " 
[24] 
--, "Visual-lidar odometry and mapping: Low-drift, ro­
bust, and fast," in Robotics and Automation aCRA), 2015 
IEEE International Conference on. 
IEEE, 2015, pp. 2174-
2181. 
[25] L. Kaul, R. Zlot, and M. Bosse, "Continuous-time three­
dimensional mapping for micro aerial vehicles with a pas­
sively actuated rotating laser scanner," Journal of Field 
Robotics, vol. 33, no. I, pp. 103-132,2016. 
[26] F. 
Pomerleau, F. 
Colas, R. 
Siegwart, and S. Magnenat, 
"Comparing icp variants on real-world data sets," Au­
tonomous Robots, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 133-148,2013. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
