warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1025.pdf
sha256: 9D1362616D275E31C415F56B22D17F0039EEDCD4488AC529C18583F77185BEF1
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 44
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise
Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied
Environment
Beiya Yang · Erfu Yang*
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Owing to the speciﬁc characteristics of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs),
the demands and applications increase dramatically for them being deployed in
conﬁned or closed space for surveying, inspection or detection to substitute hu-
man. However, Global Positioning System (GPS) may lose eﬀectiveness or become
unavailable due to the potential signal block or interference in that operational
environment. Under such circumstances, an imperative requirement on new posi-
tioning technology for UAV has emerged. With the rapid development of Radio
Frequency (RF) based localisation technologies, leveraging small wireless sensor
nodes for low-cost, low latency, low energy consumption and accurate localisation
on UAV has received signiﬁcant attention. However, no up-to-date review has been
conducted in this area so far. Therefore, this paper aims to give a comprehensive
survey on the RF based localisation systems with diﬀerent radio communication
technologies and localisation mechanisms on UAV positioning. Toward this end, an
exhaustive evaluation framework is ﬁrst established to evaluate the performance
of each system on UAV positioning from diﬀerent perspectives. Particularly, the
Ultra-wideband (UWB) based system with time-based mechanisms is highlighted
for UAV positioning under the consideration of the proposed evaluation framework.
Finally, an intensive analysis is conducted about the current challenges and the
potential research issues in this area in order to identify the promising directions
for future research.
Keywords Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) · Radio Frequency (RF) ·
Localisation Technology · Wireless Sensor Node
Beiya Yang
Department of Design, Manufacturing and Engineering Management, University of Strath-
clyde, Glasgow G1 1XJ, U.K.
Tel.: +44-7529203131
E-mail: beiya.yang@strath.ac.uk
Erfu Yang, corresponding author
Department of Design, Manufacturing and Engineering Management, University of Strath-
clyde, Glasgow G1 1XJ, U.K.
E-mail: erfu.yang@strath.ac.uk
This is a peer-reviewed, accepted author manuscript of the following article: Yang, B., & Yang, E. (2021). A survey on radio frequency based precise localisation 
technology for UAV in GPS-denied environment. Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems, 103, [38]. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-021-01500-4
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.2]
2
1 Introduction
With the rapid development of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) technology,
their applications are no longer limited to open environments. Exploiting UAVs to
substitute human for surveying, inspection, inventory management and emergency
rescue in closed, conﬁned, inaccessible or potentially dangerous space has already
become a much-sought research direction [1–6]. However, all these applications
summarised in Fig. 1, are homogeneously within the environments where Global
Positioning System (GPS) is insuﬃcient or unavailable to provide precise position
information needed for UAV, due to the satellite signal lost or interference, which
is also denoted as the GPS-denied environment. Under such circumstances, the
demand for new positioning technology to achieve the precise localisation of UAV
in that operational environment becomes impressively.
Before the detailed overview on the localisation technologies for UAV position-
ing, all the acronyms utilised in the following content are summarised in Table 1,
to be a guidance and reminder for reader to understand each of them.
Currently, diﬀerent localisation technologies have been developed for UAV po-
sitioning, such as Vision, Inertial Navigation System (INS), Infrared, Lidar, Ul-
trasonic and Radio Frequency (RF) based localisation technologies, where Table 2
provides a comparison for all these technologies. Among these, vision-based locali-
sation technologies consisting of Visual Odometry (VO) and Motion Capture Sys-
tems (Vicon, OptiTrack) are known as ones with the highest accuracy which often
serve as the ground-truth for performance evaluation. At present, the vision-based
approaches especially for VO are the most widely utilised technologies on UAV
positioning. Due to the highest accuracy and low prior information requirement,
the UAV positioning with vision-based technologies is suitable for the rescue or
exploration missions in unknown environment. Moreover, with the captured image
information, the collision avoidance, mapping and smart path planning are able to
be implemented which is critical for UAV navigation. However, the low-visibility
condition and error accumulation for VO, tedious procedure for the deployment
and extremely expensive system cost of Motion Capture Systems will all restrict
their applications on UAV. On the other hand, the INS is the other widely used
localisation technology for UAV due to the existing of built-in Inertial Measure-
ment Unit (IMU) in ﬂight controller. Yet, the error accumulation and external
magnetic ﬁeld eﬀects will lead to the accuracy degradation. Thus, the INS based
approaches are often served as part of the sensor fusion method for UAV position-
ing to smoothen the localisation result. Apart from vision-based technologies and
INS, there are still some other localisation technologies being applied on UAV in
recent years. For instance, the Ultrasonic localisation system developed by Mar-
velmind has been applied and tested by lots of researchers [7–10]. It is able to
provide up to 2cm accuracy for UAV positioning. With the on-board battery, the
Ultrasonic sensor nodes also have no inﬂuence on the UAV operation time. Never-
theless, considering the inherent nature of acoustic waves, system performance will
drop sharply in cluttered environment, the localisation coverage is limited and the
auxiliary nodes are required for localisation [11]. Furthermore, the Infrared and
Lidar based localisation technologies are also able to provide the centimetre-level
accuracy in GPS-denied environment which have already attracted lots of atten-
tion on UAV positioning. Apart from the positioning, the precise feature map of
the environment can also be established by the Infrared and Lidar based technolo-
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.3]
3
Fig. 1 UAV applications in GPS-denied environments
gies with no extra equipment required, which is signiﬁcant for the UAV navigation
in unknown and GPS-denied environment. However, these technologies will all be
susceptible to the unpredictable signal occlusion [12]. The communication range
for the infrared systems are limited within 2m to preserve the accuracy. System
cost and extremely high energy consumption will also restrict the application sce-
narios of the Lidar based systems on UAV positioning.
Owing to the rapid development and existing characteristics of the RF based
localisation systems such as low-cost, low latency, low energy consumption and
centimetre-level accuracy, their applications for UAV positioning have emerged in
recent years. From the system structure shown in Fig. 2, the UAV position in-
formation can be directly extrapolated through the communication between the
anchor nodes (auxiliary nodes with known position help for positioning) and tag
node (the sensor node needs to be positioned). All the sensor nodes are able to
power themselves with the on-board battery which has no impact on UAV oper-
ation time. Moreover, unlike the vision-based technologies, the RF based local-
isation technologies will never suﬀer from the low-visibility condition and error
accumulation. Nevertheless, in contrast to other localisation technologies, the RF
based localisation approaches still have their limitations. Firstly, the additional
anchor nodes with the prior location information are required. Secondly, the local-
isation performance is limited by the communication condition between the anchor
nodes and tag nodes. Thirdly, the RF based localisation systems cannot provide
the orientation information for UAV positioning. To solve the existing limitations
and improve the localisation accuracy, the sensor fusion methods which combined
the RF with other technologies are also proposed in recent years. With the ad-
ditional approaches, it becomes possible to provide the orientation information,
the requirement of the prior information can be reduced and the performance
ﬂuctuation caused by the measurement noise can be ﬁltered out, which is par-
ticularly important for the stable control of UAV in GPS-denied environment.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.4]
4
Fig. 2 Localisation structure for RF based UAV localisation system
Nevertheless, the system performance may be restricted by the limitation of one
localisation technology. For instance, the fusion method based on RF and Vision
may lose the eﬀectiveness in the low visibility condition and the performance of the
fusion method based on RF and INS may be inﬂuenced by the external magnetic
ﬁeld eﬀects. Moreover, the additional components may lead to the increase of the
system cost and energy consumption which also need to be considered. Despite de-
fects exist, the RF based localisation technologies still attract lots of attention on
UAV positioning in GPS-denied environment due to the existing characteristics.
As shown in Fig. 3, a fast growth can be seen in the past few years.
However, no up-to-date review has been conducted in this area currently. Some
existing survey in [13, 14] mainly focused on the overview for all the existing in-
door localisation or ranging technologies, no speciﬁc technology or application is
considered. Some of the review articles in [15,16] paid a close attention to the RF
based indoor localisation technologies, but still no speciﬁc application was con-
sidered. Others in [17–19] mainly focused on the overview of the existing UAV
localisation and navigation technologies in GPS-denied environment, the detailed
review for the RF based technologies was not presented. Most recently, Shule
et al. [20] reviewed the localisation technology for multi-UAVs and multi-robot
leveraging Ultra-wideband (UWB) based system is the most relevant paper in
this area. However, the comparison and discussion for other radio communication
technologies and localisation mechanisms on UAV positioning were not considered.
According to our investigation, a review focusing also on the RF based localisation
technologies and UAV positioning is currently missing from the literature, despite
its necessity. Therefore, it is crucial to provide a comprehensive overview and de-
tailed discussion on the RF based UAV localisation technologies in GPS-denied
environment to identify the promising directions for further research. To further
present the diﬀerence and verify the signiﬁcance of our work, the comparison with
the existing survey in the relevant area is given in Table 3.
The main contributions for this paper are listed as follows:
– A comprehensive overview for the existing RF based UAV localisation systems
with diﬀerent radio communication technologies is provided. The pros and cons
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.5]
5
Table 1 List of Acronyms
Acronyms
Full Name
Acronyms
Full Name
6-DOF
6 Degrees of Freedom
AWGN
Additional White Gaus-
sian Noise
AOA
Angle of Arrival
AOD
Angle of Departure
AI
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
ATPL
Asymmetrical
Time-
stamping
and
Passive
Listening
AER
Auxiliary Equipment Re-
quirements
BLE
Bluetooth Low Energy
CIR
Channel
Impulse
Re-
sponse
CSI
Channel State Informa-
tion
CNN
Convolutional
Neural
Network
CI
Covariance Intersection
DOA
Direction of Arrival
DS-TWR
Double-sided
Two-way
Ranging
EC
Energy Consumption
EKF
Extended Kalman Filter
FIR
Finite Impulse Response
FTSP
Flooding Time Synchro-
nisation Protocol
GNSS
Global Navigation Satel-
lite System
GPS
Global Positioning Sys-
tem
HAIP
High
Accuracy
Indoor
Positioning
HiQuadLoc
High-speed
Quadrotor
Localisation
IVM
Import Vector Machine
IMU
Inertial
Measurement
Unit
INS
Inertial Navigation Sys-
tem
inverse-NDFT
inverse Non-uniform Dis-
crete Fourier Transform
KF
Kalman Filter
KFPF
Kalman Filter and Parti-
cle Filter
KPIs
Key Performance Indica-
tors
LS-SVM
Least
Square
Support
Vector Machine
LC
Linear Consensus
LOS
Line-of-sight
LA
Localisation Accuracy
LCR
Localisation Coverage
L/U
Localisation
Latency/
Update Rate
LR-WPAN
Low-rate
Wireless
Per-
sonal Area Networks
MAVs
Micro Air Vehicles
MDS
Multidimensional Scaling
NLR
Non-linear Regression
NLOS
Non-line-of-sight
OFDM
Orthogonal
Frequency
Division Multiplex
RF
Radio Frequency
RFID
Radio Frequency Identiﬁ-
cation
RTLS
Real Time Location Ser-
vice
RSS
Received Signal Strength
RNN
Recurrent
Neural
Net-
work
RBS
Reference-broadcast Syn-
chronisation
RVM
Relevance
Vector
Ma-
chine
RVs
Relevance Vectors
RMSE
Root Mean Squared Er-
ror
SOCR
Second-order
Cone
Re-
laxation
SDR
Semideﬁnite Relaxation
SALMA
Single-anchor
Local-
isation
System
using
Multipath Assistance
SPEAR
Source Position Estima-
tion for Anchor position
uncertainty Reduction
SIG
Special Interest Group
SDE
Stability in Diﬀerent En-
vironment
SVM
Support Vector Machine
SVs
Support Vectors
SDS-TWR
Symmetric Double-sided
Two-way Ranging
SC
System Cost
TDOA
Time Diﬀerence of Ar-
rival
TOD
Time of Departure
TOF/TOA
Time of Flight/Time of
Arrival
TPSN
Timing-sync Protocol for
Sensor Networks
TWR
Two-way Ranging
TW-TOF
Two-way Time of Flight
UHF
Ultra-high Frequency
UWB
Ultra-wideband
UAVs
Unmanned Aerial Vehi-
cles
UKF
Unscented Kalman Filter
VO
Visual Odometry
W/S
Weight/Size
WCL
Weighted Centroid Local-
isation
WLPS
Wireless Local Position-
ing System
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.6]
6
Table 2 Comparison for conventional technologies on UAV positioning
Accuracy
Localisation
Coverage
System
Cost
Deployment
Diﬃculty
Weaknesses
Vision
Odometry
Up to cen-
timetre
N/A
Low
Low
Suﬀer
from
low-visibility
condition, error
accumulation
Motion
Capture
System
Millimetre
accuracy
Around
6-30m
for
each
camera
to
pre-
serve
the
accuracy
Extremely
high
High
Extremely high
system
cost,
hard to deploy
INS (IMU)
Up
to
decimetre
N/A
Low
Low
Error accumu-
lation, external
magnetic
ﬁeld
eﬀects
Ultrasonic
Up to cen-
timetre
Up to 10m
Low
Medium
Vulnerable
to
Non-line-of-
sight
(NLOS)
path
and
en-
vironment
variables,
re-
quire auxiliary
nodes,
no
orientation
information
Infrared
Up to mil-
limetre
Up to 2m
High
Medium
Small
cover-
age, vulnerable
to
NLOS
path,
high
system
cost,
no
orientation
information
Lidar
Up to mil-
limetre
N/A
High
Low
High
system
cost,
vul-
nerable
to
NLOS
path,
high
energy
consumption
RF
Up to cen-
timetre
Up to 300m
Low
Medium
Require
aux-
iliary
nodes,
high
commu-
nication
cost,
vulnerable
to
NLOS
path,
no
orientation
information
Sensor
fusion
based
on
RF
and
other
technologies
Up to cen-
timetre
Up to 300m
Medium
Medium
System
per-
formance
may
be
restricted
by
the
limi-
tation
of
one
localisation
technology,
the
additional
components
may
lead
to
the increase of
the system cost
and
energy
consumption
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.7]
7
Fig. 3 Publication (Google Scholar) on RF based UAV localisation technologies up to the
given year
Table 3 Comparison with the existing literature
Existing
Literature
GPS-
denied
Localisation
or Ranging
Localisation
Mechanism
RF
Localisation
UAV
Positioning
Evaluation
Framework
for UAV
Application
Existing
Challenges
Brena et al.
[13]
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Singh et al.
[14]
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Zafari et al.
[15]
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yassin
et
al. [16]
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
P´erez et al.
[17]
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Lu
et
al.
[18]
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Balamurugan
et al. [19]
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Wang et al.
[20]
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Our work
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
of each system is discussed to highlight their suitability and challenges on UAV
positioning.
– A detailed survey and discussion for the classical localisation mechanisms with
the existing RF based UAV localisation systems are given to analyse their pos-
sibility and suitability on precise UAV positioning in GPS-denied environment.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.8]
8
– Considering the lack of assessment system, an evaluation framework is es-
tablished to provide an overall consideration and rational estimation on Key
Performance Indicators (KPIs) of UAV positioning with RF based localisation
technologies in GPS-denied environment. The current RF based UAV local-
isation systems are assessed under the proposed framework to provide the
evidence for challenge discussion.
– Finally, in order to provide a clear guidance for future research, an in-depth
discussion and generalisation are given for the current challenges and potential
research issues on UAV localisation with RF based technologies in GPS-denied
environment.
The rest of paper is structured as follows. Section 2 elaborates the existing RF
based UAV localisation systems with diﬀerent radio communication technologies,
gives a comprehensive overview and discussion of each to analyse the pros and
cons. Subsequently, a review and comparison for the classical localisation mecha-
nisms with RF based UAV localisation systems such as Received Signal Strength
(RSS), Angle of Arrival (AOA), Time of Flight/Time of Arrival (TOF/TOA),
Time Diﬀerence of Arrival (TDOA) and Fingerprint etc. are presented in Section
3 to evaluate the eﬀectiveness on UAV positioning in GPS-denied environment.
Section 4 mainly focuses on the establishment of evaluation framework to compre-
hensively assess the current RF based UAV localisation systems. Section 5 analyses
the current challenges for RF based localisation technologies on UAV positioning,
gives the discussion on the pros and cons for current solutions and potential re-
search issues in this area to serve as the guidance for future research. Finally, a
conclusion is given in Section 6 to summarise the full paper.
2 RF based UAV Localisation Systems
In this section, an overview of the existing RF based UAV localisation systems with
diﬀerent radio communication technologies are elaborated. Subsequently, an in-
depth discussion and analysis for the suitability and challenges of each technology
on precise UAV localisation are presented. Moreover, several state-of-the-art RF
based localisation systems which successfully achieve decimetre-level localisation
accuracy are also reviewed, owing to the potential applications on UAV localisation
in the future. Radio communication technologies including Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Zig-
bee, Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) and UWB based localisation systems
shown in Fig. 4 are discussed in detail in the following subsections.
2.1 Wi-Fi based Localisation System
Wi-Fi, belonging to the IEEE 802.11 standard family, is known as one of the most
commonly used wireless network technologies in the last several decades. Due to
the universality, Wi-Fi turns into one of the simplest implementation localisation
technologies, and several researches have already been done on UAV positioning.
In [21], a Wi-Fi based precise UAV position estimation and collision avoidance
system was implemented through the consideration of coloured measurement noise
model and localisation with Extended Kalman Filter (EKF). Diﬀerently, another
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.9]
9
Fig. 4 RF based localisation systems
Wi-Fi based UAV navigation system was designed in [22], with linear Kalman Fil-
ter (KF) to lower the computational complexity of EKF for energy consumption
reduction. On the other hand, diﬀerent from the localisation with single tech-
nology, a cooperative UAV localisation approach was proposed in [23]. With the
combination between Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS), UWB, IMU and
Wi-Fi, a decimetre-level localisation accuracy was achieved. However, the accuracy
was reduced to 3m when only Wi-Fi module exists. Considering the meter-level
accuracy, only outdoor application is suitable for the aforementioned systems. To
further improve the accuracy, the algorithm proposed in [24] leveraged Multidi-
mensional Scaling (MDS) and Weighted Centroid Localisation (WCL) achieved
decimetre-level localisation accuracy. However, many more access points (anchor
nodes) are required to preserve the accuracy and the evaluation has only been done
in simulation. Importantly, the inﬂuence of NLOS error caused by unpredictable
people or object was not taken into account for all the aforementioned systems.
As discussed, UAV positioning with Wi-Fi based localisation system is still re-
stricted owing to the unacceptable accuracy and unreliable performance. However,
the development of Wi-Fi technology and introduction of additional equipment
like massive antenna array still preserve the opportunity for decimetre-level ac-
curacy and reliable localisation performance with Wi-Fi based system. Currently,
the most popular works in this area are Chronos [25] and SpotFi [26]. They all
achieved decimetre-level accuracy with Wi-Fi based system but under diﬀerent
methods. In [25], frequency hopping was exploited for emulation of wideband ra-
dio to enhance the bandwidth of Wi-Fi signal. Time resolution is inversely related
to the radio bandwidth, that is the reason why precise time-based measurement
can be obtained. Meanwhile, Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplex (OFDM)
and inverse Non-uniform Discrete Fourier Transform (inverse-NDFT) were applied
to eliminate the packet detection delay and identify direct path to keep system
performance in NLOS environment. Finally, a median accuracy of 65cm in Line-of-
sight (LOS) and 98cm in NLOS environment were attained with the oﬀ-the-shelf
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.10]
10
commercial Wi-Fi modules. Moreover, system performance was tested on a com-
mercial drone (AscTec Quadrotor) where the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
of relative distance was 4.2cm. However, in strong NLOS environments it will lose
eﬀectiveness, due to the dominant peak of Channel Impulse Response (CIR) not
necessarily characterising the direct path. In addition, energy consumption of the
system keeps high owing to the sweep of multi-frequencies. Unlike [25], [26] intro-
duced AOA for precise localisation. A super-resolution algorithm was presented
for precise AOA computation and combination of AOA and TOF was utilised
for direct path identiﬁcation to overcome the inﬂuence of NLOS path in clut-
tered environment. Finally, the median error of 0.4m and 1.6m were achieved in
LOS and strong NLOS scenarios. However, with additional antenna array, the
operation time and application scenarios will be restricted. In order to reduce
the communication cost and exclude the additional components, Li et al. [27] de-
signed a TDOA based localisation approach with commercial 80MHz Wi-Fi system
achieved 0.23m and 1.5m accuracy for outdoor and indoor applications which is
much more suitable for UAV localisation. However, a localisation server and ad-
ditional synchronisation algorithm are needed for precise localisation. Moreover,
many more sniﬀer nodes (anchor nodes) are required to be deployed to preserve
the accuracy in NLOS environment.
On the other hand, lots of ﬁngerprint-based approaches emerge in recent years,
which are able to achieve the decimetre-level accuracy with Wi-Fi based system
[28–34]. However, with the inherent rule of ﬁngerprint, it is not suitable for UAV
localisation in dynamic or unknown environment, detailed information will be
given in Section 3.5.
2.2 Bluetooth based Localisation System
Bluetooth, a family member of the IEEE 802.15 standard, also known as one of
the extensively utilised communication technologies in our daily life, which works
on the same frequency band compared with Wi-Fi. But Bluetooth shows low cost,
lower energy consumption and small size features, especially with the emerging
technology Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) developed by Bluetooth Special Interest
Group (SIG) [35]. With the aforementioned characteristics, scientiﬁc researches
and applications on precise localisation technology based on Bluetooth or BLE are
growing dramatically in recent years. However, due to the limited bandwidth, low
cost and low energy consumption features, it is unrealistic to implement time-based
or angle-based localisation mechanisms on Bluetooth based localisation systems.
Therefore, RSS turns into the most commonly used localisation mechanism for
Bluetooth and BLE.
Currently, several Bluetooth based localisation systems have already been de-
signed for UAV positioning in GPS-denied environment. In [36], a UAV patrol
system was designed for UAV navigation in GPS unstable area through RSS mea-
surements from Bluetooth beacon. In both [37] and [38], relative localisation for
UAV swarm was achieved with Bluetooth beacons. To improve the accuracy, au-
thors in [37] and [38] all fused the other measurements such as odometry, altitude,
velocity and displacement information from additional components with RSS from
BLE and Bluetooth beacons achieved precise localisation and collision avoidance
of UAV. Apart from the applications on UAV, [39] and [40] both presented the
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.11]
11
Bluetooth based localisation system for robot navigation in GPS-denied environ-
ment. The authors in [39] mainly focused on RSS calibration, leveraged 10th order
Finite Impulse Response (FIR) ﬁlter for measurement noise mitigation which ﬁ-
nally achieved a nominal error of 10cm on distance measurement. Whereas, the
authors in [40] more focused on the distance obtaining and position estimation
methods to improve the performance. A novel method for distance estimation and
trilateration approach was proposed which achieved ﬁnal error of 0.427 ± 0.229m.
In addition, some commercial BLE based localisation systems which can achieve
decimetre-level accuracy are also reviewed in this paper, due to the potential for
UAV positioning. iBeacon [41] proposed by Apple Inc in 2013 is the typical rep-
resentative. In [42], the localisation performance of iBeacon was evaluated with
diﬀerent placement patterns. Where the average accuracy below 1m was obtained,
but only in open environment. For accuracy improvement, a joint Kalman Filter
and Particle Filter (KFPF) algorithm was presented and implemented with iBea-
cons in [43] which successfully achieved the median localisation error of 0.7m and
0.947m in 2D and 3D environment and showed robustness in NLOS environment.
However, the accuracy was obtained with seven iBeacons, as only three iBeacons
exist, accuracy decreased by half. Besides, with the high computational complexity,
the localisation latency and system reliability will also be inﬂuenced. Therefore,
further research is still required for UAV applications. Rule out of iBeacon, other
commercial systems which utilise BLE for precise localisation, like High Accuracy
Indoor Positioning (HAIP) [44] developed by Nokia and Gimbal proximity bea-
con [45] presented by Qualcomm all keep the possibility for UAV localisation in
GPS-denied environment. However, further research is still required especially for
the problem of small localisation coverage and vulnerable to NLOS path.
2.3 Zigbee based Localisation System
Zigbee is the communication protocol that standardises the higher layers of the
protocol stack under the IEEE 802.15.4 standard. It deﬁnes the characteristics of
the physical and MAC layers for Low-rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-
WPAN) [46]. Zigbee shows low data rate, low energy consumption and low-cost
features which is targeted towards monitoring, automation and remote-control
applications [47]. Compared with Bluetooth, Zigbee shows lower data rate, lower
energy consumption, longer coverage range and accommodate up to 65000 com-
munication nodes for one sub-network. However, Zigbee still vulnerable to the
inﬂuence of NLOS path and low data rate may cause high localisation latency
which runs counter to the requirements on UAV. Thus, only one scientiﬁc paper
utilising Zigbee based system for UAV localisation has been carried out currently,
according to our investigation. In [48], a UAV localisation system was proposed
which combined Zigbee with INS achieved the absolute accuracy of 20cm on an
automated quadrotor APM 2.0. However, the inﬂuence of NLOS path was not
considered, system performance was only tested in open area. Meanwhile, the lo-
calisation latency was not mentioned, only a sampling rate for localisation at 1s
was set in simulation platform.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.12]
12
2.4 RFID based Localisation System
RFID is designed as a wireless communication mean which utilises RF electromag-
netic ﬁelds for identiﬁcation and tracking. On the basis of response mode, RFID
tag nodes can be divided into three categories [49]:
– Passive tag. Receive signal passively and answer back using the power from the
emitted signal by the RFID reader. There is no requirement of internal power
source, smallest size and lowest cost within all the types of RFID tag nodes.
However, communication range is limited (roughly one to ﬁve meters).
– Semi-passive tag. It receives signal passively, but utilises the on-board bat-
tery to generate the transmitting power. Additional function such as real-time
tracking or environment detection can be provided. However, communication
range still remains short and new problems such as extra weight, larger size,
higher cost, shorter life and temperature sensitivity are brought in [50].
– Active tag. It is able to transmit signal actively with the on-board battery. It
mainly utilises in Real Time Location Service (RTLS). It has the ability to
broadcast signal periodically for data communication and localisation. How-
ever, its weight, size, cost and energy consumption also need to be considered.
Meanwhile, the aforementioned nodes are all sensitive to harsh environments
and contribute to radio noise which may seriously degenerate localisation perfor-
mance.
Considering the unique characteristic of passive RFID node, scientiﬁc researches
on UAV localisation with this technology have emerged in recent years. Within
them, two diﬀerent systems designed by Zhang et al. in [51] and [52] are the typi-
cal representative. In [51], a RFID based 6 Degrees of Freedom (6-DOF) enhanced
localisation system for UAV called RFUAV was designed. Thanks to the small size
and no power supply feature of passive RFID, position and orientation information
could be garnered through communication between RFID readers and the passive
RFID tag nodes (≥3) deployed on UAV in the system. Finally, the mean error
of 0.04m and 2.5◦were obtained with low localisation latency through commer-
cial oﬀ-the-shelf RFID equipment. On the other hand, instead of localising UAV
itself, the other UAV navigation system was also designed by the same research
group [52],where the navigation was achieved with the localisation of UAV hand-
held controller. In this system, the passive RFID nodes were deployed on UAV
controller. With the same computation method, the 6-DOF pose of the UAV con-
troller could be calculated. Finally, the control commands will be generated from
the controller’s pose and sent to UAV for navigation in indoor environment. Even
high accuracy and low latency localisation can be achieved as aforementioned.
Owing to the inherent characteristics of RFID, the systems are still vulnerable to
NLOS path and the localisation coverage range is limited by the communication
range of RFID readers. Therefore, the aforementioned systems are only suitable
for short range and free space UAV positioning or navigation. Diﬀerently, Choi
et al. [53] and Longhi et al. [54] both designed the passive Ultra-high Frequency
(UHF) RFID based UAV positioning system with RFID reader deployed on UAV.
In the localisation process, the communication between RFID reader on UAV and
reference RFID nodes embedded on the ﬂoor and plant vases was exploited to mea-
sure RSS information for UAV positioning. Finally, the authors in [54] declared
that a decimetre-level accuracy could be garnered. However, performance of these
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.13]
13
two approaches is still vulnerable to NLOS path and localisation coverage is still
restricted.
2.5 UWB based Localisation System
The UWB is known as a sequence of impulse radio utilising ultra-wideband. It
oﬀers the enormous development opportunities in radar, safety and position appli-
cations [55]. Diﬀerent from the narrowband signal, with the ultra-wideband and
impulse radio, it is possible to transmit the signal with extremely short dura-
tion time (0.20ns-1.5ns) where a high temporal resolution can be achieved, also
showing the robustness to multipath fading [56]. Moreover, a short duration time
means a low transmit power. Therefore, the low energy consumption will be an-
other key feature for the UWB, in contrast to other UAV localisation technologies.
But compared with other radio communication technologies, the energy consump-
tion of UWB still keeps high. Considering the visible characteristics of UWB, it
becomes a reliable and feasible localisation technology which has drawn lots of
attention for UAV positioning in the past few years [6, 57–75]. Among them, the
group from Nanyang Technological University is the most in-depth research group
in this area. Up to now, they have already published 9 papers on UAV localisation
with UWB within 4 years [57,59,65–70,74].
According to the method for localisation, our review will be given in three
parts. The ﬁrst part will be auxiliary localisation where localisation is achieved
with known position and ﬁxed anchor nodes. The system proposed in [6,57–64] all
utilised the communication between tag node deployed on UAV and ﬁxed anchor
nodes for UAV localisation. Among them, in [57–59], the conventional Two-way
Time of Flight (TW-TOF) approach was exploited to calculate the time delay be-
tween tag node and anchor nodes. Meanwhile, velocity and displacement informa-
tion gathered by IMU was also taken into account which fused with the aforemen-
tioned information by EKF to improve the localisation accuracy and keep the reli-
ability. Moreover, authors in [57] also proposed a calibration and outlier detection
method through the linear regression and calculation of Mahalanobis Distance [76]
which was utilised for UWB information calibration and unreasonable data detec-
tion. Unlikely, the authors in [59] mainly focused on anchor self-localisation which
leveraged the Non-linear Regression (NLR) achieved anchor self-localisation and
position calibration. Finally, decimetre-level accuracy was garnered for all these
three systems, especially for [57], the average position error in x–y plane of 0.071
m and the maximum error of 0.2m within 7 × 7m GPS-denied area were obtained.
To further improve the accuracy, authors in [60–62] all focused on the accuracy
improvement through the mitigation of clock drift. Where the hybrid approach
based on MDS, loosely-coupled EKF and Double-sided Two-way Ranging (DS-
TWR) was proposed in [60]. Symmetric Double-sided Two-way Ranging (SDS-
TWR) was exploited in [61] and [62] for clock drift mitigation. Diﬀerently, You
et al. [63] applied Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF) to avoid neglecting the high-
order terms of the nonlinear observation equation for performance improvement.
On the other hand, UWB based UAV localisation systems with TDOA localisation
mechanism were designed in [6] and [64], in order to reduce the communication
cost compared with TW-TOF, DS-TWR and SDS-TWR. In their systems, UAV
position can be calculated directly through the broadcast signal from tag node on
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.14]
14
UAV. Detailed information about the localisation principle for each localisation
mechanism will be given in Section 3.4.
To remedy the requirement of ﬁxed anchor nodes, the approaches which lever-
age the communication between multi-UAVs for relative localisation emerge in
recent years. In [65,66], a relative localisation approach was designed for relative
localisation and formation control of multi-UAVs. In their system, the accurate
distance and displacement information measured by UAV in diﬀerent position
through UWB and IMU were applied for UAV relative initial position estima-
tion. Afterwards, the relative position between UAVs could be calculated through
EKF, where the estimated initial position was utilised as the initial input of EKF.
According to their simulation and experiment results, the system was capable of
meter level relative localisation and formation control. However, an appropriate
trajectory for UAV needs to be deﬁned to preserve the performance, including the
nonlinear path and piecewise linear path. Length and shape of the trajectory all
have huge impact on the diﬀerent extent of localisation performance. Further devel-
opment has been done in [67–69] from the same research group. In the new system,
the requirement of appropriate trajectory was no longer needed. Instead, they ex-
ploited UWB and IMU to measure the distance and velocity information for UAV
itself, also leveraged information exchange between dynamic UAVs to obtain the
precise relative position for UAV swarm through graph theory based approach.
The algorithm could ﬁnally achieve decimetre-level accuracy according to their
experiment results. On the other hand, another cooperative localisation approach
was presented by the same group [70]. They proposed two diﬀerent methods called
Covariance Intersection (CI) and Linear Consensus (LC) based ﬁlter achieved the
cooperative localisation by information exchange and states estimation with only
one landmark. Cao et al. [71] also designed a UWB based relative localisation
system which equipped all the anchor nodes on leader UAV to localise the fol-
lower equipped with tag node for formation control of UAV swarm. Likewise, the
authors in [72] designed the same UWB based localisation system which deployed
four anchor nodes on ground station (vehicle of a military convoy) to navigate
UAV.
Finally, in order to improve the localisation accuracy and coverage, sensor
fusion methods which combined UWB with diﬀerent types of vision-based local-
isation approaches have been presented. In [73], RGB-D sensing was combined
for mapping and localisation of UAV to implement long-term autonomous oper-
ation. In [74], an integrated UWB-Vision system was put forward to achieve the
autonomous landing for UAV on moving target. Where UWB, IMU, Optical-ﬂow
and Vision were all integrated help for approaching and landing on the moving
target. Tiemann et al. [75] also designed a UWB-Vision approach which integrated
UWB with monocular SLAM [77,78] to improve system performance and increase
localisation coverage.
2.6 Summary and Discussion on the RF based UAV Localisation Systems
A summary and discussion for pros and cons of the existing RF based UAV locali-
sation systems with diﬀerent radio communication technologies are given in Table
4. Among them, UWB based systems attract lots of attention on precise UAV
positioning which has already published 20 papers in the last ﬁve years, owing
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.15]
15
Table 4 Comparison for the existing RF based UAV localisation systems with diﬀerent radio
communication technologies
Advantage
Disadvantage
Existing Liter-
ature
Wi-Fi
Implementation simplicity,
large coverage, high trans-
mission rate
High energy consumption,
meter-level
accuracy,
vul-
nerable to NLOS path
[21–24]
Bluetooth
Implementation simplicity,
low energy consumption
Small coverage, low trans-
mission rate, vulnerable to
NLOS path
[36–38]
Zigbee
Extremely low energy con-
sumption, low system cost
Low
transmission
rate,
high latency, vulnerable to
NLOS path
[48]
RFID
Extremely low energy con-
sumption,
implementation
simplicity, low system cost,
high accuracy with speciﬁc
approach
Small
coverage
(1m-5m),
vulnerable to NLOS path
[51–54]
UWB
High
accuracy,
extremely
high transmission rate, low
latency, immune to interfer-
ence, robustness to NLOS
path
High
energy
consumption
and system cost compared
with other radio communi-
cation technologies
[6,57–75]
to the characteristics of high accuracy, low latency and robust to harsh environ-
ment. Moreover, considering the superiority of UWB, sensor fusion approaches
which combine UWB with Vision, IMU or other localisation technologies emerge
in recent years are also valuable for further research in this area.
3 Classical Localisation Mechanisms
In this section, a detailed review for the classical localisation mechanisms including
RSS, AOA, TOF/TOA, TDOA and Fingerprint etc. with RF based UAV locali-
sation systems are presented. Meanwhile, the capability, suitability and challenges
for each on UAV positioning are also summarised by the end of this section.
3.1 RSS based Localisation Mechanism
The RSS is known as the ﬁeld intensity of a signal measured at the receiver [13].
With the measured RSS, it is simple to quantitatively derive the signal attenu-
ation and calculate the transmission distance followed by an appropriate signal
propagation model. Subsequently, position information can be estimated with tri-
lateration or multilateration by the transmission distance. The propagation model
given by [79] is shown in Eq. 1, and Fig. 5 gives the schematic diagram of the RSS
based localisation mechanism.
P2 = P1 + 10logK −10γlog d21
d0 + n
(1)
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.16]
16
Fig. 5 RSS based localisation mechanism
Where d21 represents the calculative distance between receiver and transmitter,
P2 and P1 are assumed as the signal power at each of them, K is a constant
determined by antenna gain and reference distance d0, γ represents the path loss
factor, n is the measurement noise for RSS which is commonly known as Additional
White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) with zero mean and variance of σ2.
As recording RSS is the basic function for almost all the communication de-
vices in nowadays. RSS based localisation mechanism becomes the simplest im-
plementable mechanism among RF localisation technology. However, in actual
applications, especially in GPS-denied environment, wireless signal is much more
vulnerable to external environmental disturbance, such as occlusion, multipath
eﬀect etc. Meanwhile, signal attenuation changes continually with environment
variable or media change. Hence, RSS based localisation mechanism is not suit-
able for UAV localisation in harsh or dynamic environment. However, thanks to
cost saving and implementation simplicity features, RSS based localisation mech-
anism still draws lots of attention in open environment.
As aforementioned in Section 2, RSS based localisation mechanism has al-
ready been widely used on UAV localisation. In [21], a UAV position estimation
and collision avoidance system were designed which analysed coloured noise in
RSS measurement to improve system accuracy. Masiero et al. [22] exploited RSS
from nodes communication with linear KF for localisation which successful reduced
the computational complexity and improved the operation time of UAV. Zhou et
al. [36] utilised RSS measured by Bluetooth beacons achieved UAV navigation in
GPS unstable environment. Yu et al. [48] exploited RSS measurements collected
by Zigbee nodes as the input of EKF achieved decimetre localisation accuracy.
Cheng et al. [80] designed a NLOS detection strategy for mini-UAV localisation
system which analysed RSS measurement model to identify propagation condition
for NLOS detection to improve localisation accuracy. Tovkach et al. [81] proposed
an RSS based localisation approach for UAV with unknown transmit power. Soria
et al. [37] and Coppola et al. [38] all designed the relative localisation approaches,
applied relative distance from RSS with additional odometry and altitude mea-
surements achieved relative localisation of UAV swarm.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.17]
17
Fig. 6 AOA based localisation mechanism
3.2 AOA based Localisation Mechanism
The AOA, denoted here as the Angle of Arrival, also known as the Direction of
Arrival (DOA), is the localisation mechanism which exploits the angle information
recorded at multiple receivers for positioning. As shown in Fig. 6, with the AOA in-
formation from antenna array and the prior location information of anchor nodes,
UAV position can be estimated through the triangulation. Clearly, with the AOA
based localisation mechanism, the minimum number of anchor nodes for localisa-
tion can be reduced which can expand the application scenario of UAV. Moreover,
the traditional RF based localisation system only provides position information.
However, it is possible for the AOA based localisation mechanism to provide the 6-
DOF state information which have great signiﬁcance for UAV positioning. Owing
to the existing characteristics, several scientiﬁc researches have been conducted
for UAV localisation with the AOA based localisation mechanism.
Pavlenko et al. [82] proposed a 16-element sparse dome array for UAV locali-
sation based on AOA localisation mechanism where 1σ-values of less than 2◦was
achieved. For further research, they also developed another localisation system
for UAV via radar-based Wireless Local Positioning System (WLPS) [83].The ex-
perimental results show that the RMSE of the 3D-positioning equals to 36 cm
with one anchor node involved, and improved to 31cm with four anchor nodes
involved. However, as discussed in their paper, weight of radar unit with the inte-
grated dome array is about 1.78kg, therefore, the operation time of UAV will be
inﬂuenced greatly. Diﬀerent from UAV positioning, Nguyen et al. [84] designed an
RF-based localisation system focused on the detection and tracking of UAV and
its controller with AOA measurements. However, only average error of 12.2◦and
12.71m were achieved.
On the other hand, several recent proposed AOA-based high accuracy locali-
sation systems have also been reviewed, considering their potential application to
UAV positioning. Spotﬁ[26] is known as the typical representative which realised
decimetre-level localisation accuracy in harsh environment with the precise AOA
information. Zhang et al. [85] designed a 3D-localisation system which achieved
the median localisation error of 0.78m in indoor environment through AOA based
localisation mechanism with commercial oﬀ-the-shelf infrastructures. Soltanaghaei
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.18]
18
Fig. 7 TOF/TOA based localisation mechanism
et al. [86] proposed a novel localisation approach that realised accurate localisation
through multipath of AOA with only one anchor node.
Although, much more advantages of the AOA based approaches can be ob-
tained, there are still many factors that may inﬂuence the localisation perfor-
mance, especially in GPS-denied environment. Owing to the inherent features of
the triangulation, even a small measurement error can cause a huge impact on
the localisation accuracy with the increasing of transmission distance which will
restrict the ﬂight range of UAV. Besides, the system cost, energy consumption and
payload of UAV will be increased, considering the additional complex hardware.
Most importantly, in dense multipath environment, the AOA estimates are bi-
ased in general. So, further research is still needed for the AOA based localisation
mechanism on UAV positioning in GPS-denied environment.
3.3 TOF/TOA based Localisation Mechanism
Both the TOF and TOA are the classical time-based localisation mechanisms
for the RF based localisation systems. They all exploit the time delay between
the transmitter and receiver for range estimation as shown in Fig. 7. With the
range information, the UAV positioning can be realised through the trilateration
or multilateration. Compared with the RSS and AOA, the TOF/TOA is able to
provide the high accuracy performance with no additional equipment required,
which is signiﬁcant for UAV positioning in GPS-denied environment. However,
clearly from Fig. 7, the restrict clock synchronisation between all the sensor nodes
in the network is required.
To eliminate the impact of clock diﬀerence, several diﬀerent approaches have
been proposed [87–89]. The conventional approach is known as Two-way Ranging
(TWR) or TW-TOF. As shown in Fig. 8, with the existence of Time of Depar-
ture (TOD) and TOA from transmitter and measured response delay on receiver,
it is able to subtract clock diﬀerence theoretically. Owing to the implementa-
tion simplicity and high localisation accuracy (up to centimetre-level accuracy),
TWR has already been widely used on UAV positioning in GPS-denied environ-
ment [57–59,63,65–70,72]. However, clock drift caused by unpredictable response
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.19]
19
Fig. 8 TWR/TW-TOF based localisation approach
Fig. 9 DS-TWR based localisation approach
delay and low performance crystal oscillator on sensor nodes, will lead to a preci-
sion degradation. In addition, with the increasing communication cost, localisation
latency and energy consumption cannot be overlooked.
To settle the matter, DS-TWR is proposed. As shown in Fig. 9, the inﬂuence
of clock drift is mitigated through the average time delay from two-round trip.
In [60, 71], DS-TWR has already been applied and tested for precise localisation
and formation control of UAV. In addition, for further improvement, SDS-TWR is
designed with the similar principle. Compared with DS-TWR, the interval delays
are equal on the both participating nodes. Performance of SDS-TWR on UAV
localisation has been evaluated in [61, 62], even much more precise result can be
garnered, but keeping the same clock frequency on both sides is still diﬃcult to
implement. Meanwhile, high accuracy is at the expense of additional communi-
cation cost, where position update rate will be signiﬁcantly restricted which may
inﬂuence the stability of UAV.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.20]
20
Fig. 10 TDOA based localisation mechanism
3.4 TDOA based Localisation Mechanism
Another classical time-based localisation mechanism widely used on the RF based
systems is the TDOA. Diﬀerent from the TOF/TOA, the TDOA based localisation
mechanism utilises the distance diﬀerence between each receiver for positioning.
Speciﬁcally, it leverages the recordings of the TOAs from the broadcast signals by
the transmitter to calculate the TDOAs for the localisation through the hyperbolic
theorem. As shown in Fig. 10, suppose the distance information between four
anchor nodes and UAV are di(i = 1, 2, 3, 4). Thus, the distance diﬀerence can
be calculated and represent as dij. With the known position information pi for
each anchor node and the record TOAs ti, position information p of UAV can be
estimated through the localisation equation below:



∥p1 −p∥−∥p2 −p∥= c(t1 −t2)
∥p1 −p∥−∥p3 −p∥= c(t1 −t3)
∥p1 −p∥−∥p4 −p∥= c(t1 −t4)
(2)
Since only the time diﬀerence from each sensor node is enough for precise po-
sitioning, the localisation latency and energy consumption of the TDOA based lo-
calisation mechanism can be reduced greatly compared with the TOA and TOF,
which can eﬀectively improve the stability and ﬂight time of the UAV in GPS-
denied environment. Considering the existing characteristics, diﬀerent localisation
systems have already been designed for UAV positioning with TDOA based lo-
calisation mechanism. Tiemann et al. [6, 90, 91] carried out a series of scientiﬁc
researches on TDOA based localisation mechanism to achieve precise localisation
for multi-UAVs and mobile robots. Likewise, the authors in [92] designed a lo-
calisation system which successfully implemented the stable control of UAV in
GPS-denied environment with measured TDOA and EKF. Sinha et al. [93] and de
Sousa et al. [94] both did related researches for UAV localisation through TDOA.
But, not mainly focused on UAV localisation in GPS-denied environment. Sinha et
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.21]
21
al. [93] intended to analyse the impact of 3D Antenna Radiation Patterns through
TDOA based localisation for UAV. The authors in [94] mainly concerned the pre-
cise localisation of UAV in urban area with a full of NLOS path. They exploited
ray-tracing ﬁngerprint build from TDOA to identify the main obstacle reﬂected
signal as virtual anchor to achieve precise localisation for UAV in NLOS scenario.
Despite precise and low latency localisation is able to achieve through TDOA
based localisation mechanism, there are still several factors that may restrict the
performance. Obviously, since TOAs are measured by diﬀerent anchor nodes, pre-
cise synchronisation is required between all these receivers. Similar to other time-
based approaches, TDOA is also vulnerable to the time-delay caused by NLOS
path and measurement noise. In addition, considering applications on UAV, lo-
calisation process is conducted by receiver or localisation server for TDOA based
localisation mechanism. Therefore, an extra step is required to send back the es-
timate position to UAV, which may cause position lost or low update rate due to
the potential signal block or interference.
3.5 Fingerprint based Localisation Mechanism
Considering that the RSS based localisation mechanism requires prior information,
deviates dramatically with the existence of the NLOS path and external interfer-
ence, is vulnerable to environment variations and measurement noises. Another
method which extracts the features from ﬁngerprint dataset built with RSS or
other radio information from the surrounding nodes for positioning is designed.
The localisation process of the ﬁngerprint-based localisation mechanism is com-
posed of oﬄine and online phases. In the oﬄine phase, the RSS and other radio
information from the diﬀerent location will be recorded to establish the ﬁngerprint
database. Then, in the online phase, the measured information from UAV will be
compared with the ﬁngerprint database for localisation.
Owing to the implementation simplicity, acceptable accuracy and ability to
construct radio map help for collision detection, ﬁngerprint attracts certain atten-
tion on UAV applications. But most of the proposed approaches are focused on
node detection through UAV with the existence of GPS in unknown environment,
only few of research pays attention to localise UAV itself. In [95], an indoor local-
isation system called a High-speed Quadrotor Localisation (HiQuadLoc) system
was designed, which successfully kept stability of UAV in indoor environment with
RSS ﬁngerprinting. In their system, a 4-D RSS interpolation scheme was proposed
which added RSS sample space to mitigate site survey overhead for reducing the
requirement of training data volume. Finally, successfully reduced localisation la-
tency, restrained the eﬀect of high-speed movement, reduced the number of RSS
sampling and improved the localisation accuracy. In addition, another ﬁngerprint-
based UAV localisation system proposed in [96] still focused on the oﬄine process.
Where tensor completion was exploited to achieve the time reduction of data col-
lection and training process in oﬄine phase.
As discussed, the characteristics of ﬁngerprint, including implementation sim-
plicity, high accuracy (decimetre-level) and ability to construct radio map all make
it suitable for UAV localisation. However, owing to the demand for large volume
of data and vulnerable to dynamic environments, there will be an upsurge of cor-
responding computational overhead and instability of localisation. Consequently,
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.22]
22
Table 5 Comparison for the existing RF based UAV localisation systems with the classical
localisation mechanisms
Advantage
Disadvantage
Existing Liter-
ature
RSS
Implementation simplicity,
cost eﬃcient
Low accuracy, vulnerable to
NLOS path and environ-
ment variables
[21, 22, 36–38,
48,80,81]
AOA
High accuracy with speciﬁc
algorithm, able to provide
orientation information, im-
mune to location ambiguity
Vulnerable to measurement
noise and NLOS path, re-
quire additional equipment,
high energy consumption,
high system cost
[82–84]
TOF/TOA
High
accuracy
with
spe-
ciﬁc algorithm, low compu-
tational complexity
Synchronisation between all
sensor nodes required, high
communication
cost,
low
update rate, vulnerable to
response delay, vulnerable
to NLOS path
[57–63,65–72]
TDOA
High accuracy, low commu-
nication cost, low latency
Synchronisation
between
anchor nodes required, vul-
nerable to NLOS path, high
computational complexity
[6,92–94]
Fingerprint
Implementation simplicity,
high
accuracy,
ability
to
construct radio map help
for collision detection
Large volume data required,
vulnerable to dynamic en-
vironment, high computa-
tional complexity
[95,96]
ﬁngerprint based localisation mechanism is not suitable for UAV localisation in
dynamic and unknown environment.
3.6 Summary and Discussion on the Classical Localisation Mechanisms
A summary and discussion for the pros and cons of the classical localisation mech-
anisms with RF based localisation systems on UAV positioning is given in Table
5. Among them, time-based localisation mechanisms including TOA/TOF and
TDOA attract lots of attention due to the high localisation accuracy. Besides,
according to our investigation, there are also lots of researches on RSS based lo-
calisation mechanisms considering the cost eﬃcient and implementation simplicity
features. But mainly focused on the applications in open environment.
4 Evaluation Framework for UAV Positioning with RF based
Localisation Technologies in GPS-denied Environment
To the authors’ best knowledge, the evaluation framework considering both the RF
based localisation technologies and UAV positioning in GPS-denied environment
is currently missing from the literature. However, quantifying system performance
and in-depth analysis for the key factors of the system are important and can be the
guidance for subsequent research. Therefore, in this section, we will elaborate and
analyse the KPIs for UAV positioning with the RF based localisation technologies
in GPS-denied environment and establish the evaluation framework.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.23]
23
4.1 Localisation Accuracy (LA)
Localisation accuracy is commonly known as the disparity between the estimated
position information and the ground-truth. Apparently, it is the conventional and
essential index for all the location-based applications or systems. In a general sense,
a higher accuracy represents a greater performance. However, under diﬀerent ap-
plications, the acceptable accuracy will be varying. For instance, for precision ma-
chining, even millimetre-level localisation accuracy is insuﬃcient. But meter-level
is enough for rescue mission in mining industry. Thus, considering the operational
environment in this paper where GPS is unavailable such as oil pressure vessel,
warehouse or mine cave, and in order to keep the stability and avoid the collision
of UAV, the decimetre-level accuracy is desired. In some extreme cases, such as
the place full of obstacles or conﬁned space, the centimetre-level accuracy is also
demanded.
4.2 Localisation Latency/ Update Rate (L/U)
Real-time or low latency localisation means the system can calculate reliable local-
isation results without any noticeable delay. It is often known as one of the indexes
to evaluate localisation performance. Generally, the traditional indoor localisation
systems are not sensitive to the localisation latency less than second-level. How-
ever, for UAV positioning, localisation latency will signiﬁcantly aﬀect the position
update rate of UAV. Considering that UAV is always in motion even when hov-
ering, a lower update rate or higher localisation latency will cause a greater gap
between each posture adjustment command, where unstable ﬂight may happen.
Thus, the update rate is always one of the most concerned indicators to measure
the performance of commercial UAV positioning system. In the design of high-
performance localisation algorithm for UAV application, the localisation latency
also needs to be considered which can be denoted as the low computational com-
plexity for the algorithm.
4.3 Stability in Diﬀerent Environment (SDE)
Compared with the outdoor environment, the applications in GPS-denied envi-
ronment are more complicated and vulnerable to multipath fading and the NLOS
path caused by the unpredictable objects or people. These will lead to the pre-
cipitous decline or violent ﬂuctuation of the localisation accuracy. In addition, the
unreasonable value is more easily to occur which may derive a non-smooth result.
This precision degradation and ﬂuctuation may cause the unstable ﬂight of UAV
or increase the crash down probability. Therefore, the environmental adaptability
will be the particular index for UAV applications in GPS-denied environment.
4.4 Auxiliary Equipment Requirements (AER)
Traditional RF based localisation systems often require the existence of anchor
nodes with known location. As above mentioned, the conventional trilateration
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.24]
24
and multilateration localisation algorithms demand at least three anchor nodes to
locate the target. However, considering the applications for UAV in GPS-denied
environment, the diﬃculty to deploy anchor nodes or measure the precise location
of these nodes will become the problem to be remedied. Therefore, the demand
degree for the auxiliary equipment will be another key index to measure the per-
formance of a RF based UAV localisation system.
4.5 Weight/Size (W/S)
Diﬀerent from other applications, the payload of UAV is extremely restricted. The
loading condition of UAV also have the close connection with the operation time
of it. The AOA based localisation mechanism has proven to achieve decimetre-
level accuracy and provide the 6-DOF position information [26,83]. However, the
size and weight of the additional antenna array will restrict the applications on
UAV. Thus, the weight and size of the localisation components becomes another
particular index for UAV positioning.
4.6 Localisation Coverage (LCR)
The localisation coverage for RF based system is commonly treated as the com-
munication range of sensor nodes which has a huge impact on the operating range
of UAV. It is varying under diﬀerent wireless communication protocols. Besides,
higher localisation coverage is also achievable with additional anchor nodes. How-
ever, the application scenario will be restricted, due to the demand for the prior
location of anchor nodes. Therefore, the balance between localisation coverage and
auxiliary equipment requirements need to be considered when designing the RF
based localisation system for UAV.
4.7 Energy Consumption (EC)
Energy consumption is always one of the primary indexes when evaluating the
performance of a RF based localisation system. For traditional applications, con-
sidering the charging diﬃculty of tag nodes, low energy consumption often means
the system is capable to keep the tag nodes alive for months or years with ordinary
batteries, which makes BLE, Zigbee and passive RFID received lots of attention.
However, for UAV positioning, there is no need to consider the circumstances that
diﬃcult to charge sensor nodes or keep them alive for months. Keeping sensor
nodes alive during the operation process and having no impact or little impact on
the operation time of UAV is enough.
4.8 System Cost (SC)
Low-cost system which can easily penetrate the consumer market and be widely
adopted is always the development direction for robotic technologies in modern
society. In addition, considering the UAV applications in GPS-denied environment,
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.25]
25
it is much more vulnerable to the unpredictable damage like crash down or control
failure. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the system cost for designing the RF
based UAV localisation system in GPS-denied environment.
4.9 Demand level discussion under diﬀerent application scenarios
To further analyse the key factors for UAV positioning, the discussion for the
demand level of each has been made according to the application scenarios. Con-
sidering it is diﬃcult to deﬁne or provide a very speciﬁc value suitable for all the
applications, only a demand level for general applications is provided. The appli-
cation scenarios of UAV in GPS-denied environment are divided into six areas,
including indoor or conﬁned space inspections, mining, bridge inspections, search
and rescue, critical infrastructure and surveying disaster sites [97]. The demand
level for each indicator under these application scenarios have been analysed and
summarised as follow.
– Indoor or conﬁned space inspections: Considering the application for indoor or
conﬁned space inspections such as the corrosion detection for oil pressure vessel
or water tanks, UAV needs to ﬂy close to the wall for a detailed inspection.
Thus, the KPIs including LA and L/U will be particularly important in case of
any collision and prevent the unexpected drift in the ﬂight area. Furthermore,
the ﬂight environment under this application scenario is relatively ﬁxed during
the operation process of UAV. Therefore, the demand level for AER and LCR
will remain low.
– Mining: Similar to the application for smart inspection, in case of any po-
tentially harmful for the components and miner in the narrow space inside
a mine, the LA and L/U will be particularly important. But diﬀerently, the
miner or equipment inside the mine will make the environment become clut-
tered, which means a higher accuracy to the centimetre-level is desired in some
extreme cases, and the SDE becomes signiﬁcant for the applications under this
circumstance.
– Bridge inspections: Another popular application for UAV in GPS-denied en-
vironment is bridge inspections. The inspector often utilises UAV to ﬂy un-
derneath bridges to inspect the corrosion, paint loss and rust which is hard to
detect with the traditional methods. Clearly, the same as the previous appli-
cations, the ﬂight area of UAV under the bridges is sorely limited. The ﬂight
environment is relatively ﬁxed during the whole process. Thus, the LA and
L/U are still the most important factors. The demand level for the SDE, AER
and LCR will all remain low.
– Search and rescue: Diﬀerent from all the aforementioned applications, the
search and rescue mission will pay more attention to search and fast locate the
salient entities within an unknown and relatively spacious environment [98].
Thus, the SDE, AER and LCR will become signiﬁcant, and the ﬂuctuation for
the LA within the meter-level and low update rate are all acceptable.
– Critical infrastructure: In the consideration of the security risks of GPS, in
some restricted area such as military bases or power plants, soldiers or engineers
often utilise UAV without GPS for monitoring. The application scenarios in
these areas can be supposed as a ﬁxed, open and large environment. Therefore,
the LCR for the localisation system is turned to be the most concerned factor.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.26]
26
Table 6 Analysis of current RF based UAV localisation systems under the proposed evaluation
framework
System
Type
LA
L/U
SDE AER W/S LCR EC
SC
[21]
Wi-Fi/RSS
Meter
10Hz
L
M
L
M
M
L
[22]
Wi-Fi/RSS
Meter
N/A
L
H
L
M
M
M
[23]
Wi-Fi/RSS
Meter
N/A
L
M
L
M
M
L
[24]
Wi-Fi/RSS
Decimetre
N/A
M
H
L
M
M
M
[36]
Bluetooth/RSS
Meter
N/A
L
H
L
L
L
L
[37]
Bluetooth/RSS
Decimetre
N/A
L
N/A L
L
L
L
[38]
Bluetooth/RSS
Decimetre
5Hz
L
N/A L
L
L
L
[48]
Zigbee/RSS
Decimetre
N/A
L
M
L
L
L
L
[51,52]
RFID
Centimetre
50Hz
L
M
L
L
L
L
[54]
RFID/RSS
Decimetre
N/A
L
H
L
L
L
L
[6]
UWB/TDOA
Centimetre
40Hz
M
M
L
L
M
M
[57]
UWB/TWR
Centimetre
40Hz
M
M
L
L
M
M
[58]
UWB/TWR
Decimetre
80Hz
M
M
L
L
M
M
[59]
UWB/TWR
Decimetre
20-250Hz
M
M
L
L
M
M
[60]
UWB/DS-TWR
Decimetre
200Hz
M
M
L
L
M
M
[61]
UWB/SDS-TWR
Decimetre
N/A
M
H
L
L
M
M
[62]
UWB/SDS-TWR
Centimetre
65-372Hz
M
H
L
M
M
M
[63]
UWB/TWR
Centimetre
N/A
M
M
L
L
M
M
[65,66]
UWB/TWR
Meter
20Hz
M
L
L
M
M
M
[67–69]
UWB/TWR
Decimetre
N/A
M
N/A L
M
M
M
[70]
UWB/TWR
Centimetre
N/A
N/A L
L
L
M
M
[71]
UWB/DS-TWR
Decimetre
N/A
M
N/A L
M
M
M
[72]
UWB/TWR
Decimetre
6.5-12ms
M
M
L
M
M
M
[73]
UWB/RGB-D
Decimetre
N/A
L
M
M
M
M
M
[74]
UWB/Vision
Decimetre
N/A
L
M
M
M
M
M
[75]
UWB/RGB-D
Decimetre
32Hz
L
M
M
M
M
M
– Surveying disaster sites: The same as the applications for search and rescue,
the most challenging part for surveying disaster sites will be the unknown
environment and unpredictable obstructions, which makes the SDE, AER and
LCR become signiﬁcant.
4.10 Evaluation and Analysis on the Existing RF based UAV Localisation
Systems
Finally, a comprehensive evaluation and analysis for the aforementioned RF based
UAV localisation systems with diﬀerent radio communication technologies under
diﬀerent localisation mechanisms is given in Table 6, utilising the established eval-
uation framework. Where, L represents low, M is assumed as medium, H means
high, N/A indicates not applicable or never mentioned in the paper. Here need
to indicate that L/U for [21,65,66,72] are the distance measurement update rate,
the localisation latency or position update rate is not mentioned in these papers.
To the authors’ best knowledge, no system exists which can satisfy all the
indicators in the framework. However, each of them has their own advantages un-
der diﬀerent circumstance. Considering the meter-level accuracy, implementation
simplicity, low system cost and large communication range of Wi-Fi based sys-
tem with the RSS based localisation mechanism, it is much more suitable for the
applications in outdoor environment to substitute or compensate the GPS for lo-
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.27]
27
calisation. Where the authors in [21] and [22] are all utilised the Wi-Fi based UAV
positioning system with the RSS based localisation mechanism for the outdoor
applications such as search and rescue, exploration and remote sensing. Diﬀer-
ently, for the Bluetooth based system with the RSS based localisation mechanism,
the communication range is restricted around 10m to keep the performance, but
the weight and size of the sensor nodes, the system cost and energy consumption
are signiﬁcantly reduced in contrast to the Wi-Fi based system. Thus, this type
of system is more eﬀective for the applications on Micro Air Vehicles (MAVs) or
micro-uavs in smaller indoor environment, where both [37] and [38] focused on the
applications under this circumstance. Furthermore, the same as the previous con-
clusion, the low data rate feature of the Zigbee based system may cause the high
localisation latency which runs counter to the requirements on UAV. Towards this
end, only a few research [48] has been carried out, which means the Zigbee based
system is not the ideal choice for UAV positioning. Similar to the Bluetooth based
system, the weight and size of the sensor nodes, system cost and energy consump-
tion of the RFID based system also remain low. But diﬀerently, the UHF RFID
signiﬁcantly improved the accuracy into the centimetre-level, and the tiny size
of passive RFID nodes makes it possible to estimate the orientation information
with multi sensor nodes equipped on UAV. However, the restricted communication
range and NLOS sensitive characteristic still limit the applications of the RFID
based UAV positioning system in smaller and open indoor environments. Finally,
we will highlight the UWB based system with the time-based localisation mech-
anisms here considering the existing characteristics and the application scenarios
in this paper. The detailed analysis for each indicator individually will be given
as follow to prove our conclusion.
– LA: As mentioned before, high time resolution is able to achieve with extremely
short duration time of transmit signal for UWB based system. Thus, decimetre
or centimetre-level localisation accuracy is simple to achieve for UWB based
system with time-based localisation mechanisms which is extremely important
for UAV positioning in GPS-denied environment.
– L/U: For RF based localisation system, the localisation latency is closely re-
lated to the data transmission rate of each radio communication technology.
Obviously, with the highest data transmission rate, UWB based system can
achieve extremely low localisation latency which is much more suitable for
UAV localisation compared with other radio communication technologies.
– SDE: With the extremely short duration time of transmit signal for UWB
based system, it is much easier to identify the signals from diﬀerent path which
makes UWB based system can resist multipath fading. Therefore, the local-
isation performance of UWB based system is much more stable than other
RF based systems in diﬀerent operational environment, especially in cluttered
environment.
– AER: The requirement for auxiliary components (anchor nodes) is the defect
for almost all the RF based localisation technologies. However, with the high
data transmission rate and ranging accuracy for UWB based system, it is
possible to realise the relative localisation for UAV swarm to get rid of this
limitation, as declared in the existing literature [67–70].
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.28]
28
– W/S: For UWB based localisation system, the precise localisation is achieved
by the compact and light weight wireless UWB sensor nodes, where the weight
and size of the sensor nodes only have little impact on UAV [99,100].
– LCR: As aforementioned, the localisation coverage is related to the wireless
communication protocols. Compared with other RF based localisation tech-
nologies, even UWB based sensor node is not the one with the widest commu-
nication range, but still keep large localisation coverage [99–101].
– EC: Compared with other RF based localisation systems like Bluetooth, Zigbee
and Passive RFID, the energy consumption for UWB based system is much
higher. But considering the application on UAV positioning, there is no need to
keep the sensor node working for months or years, keeping it alive during the
operation process of UAV is enough. Thus, even UWB based system is not the
one with lowest energy consumption, but still suitable for UAV positioning.
– SC: Due to the special requirements of UWB based system, the system cost is
much higher than other RF based systems. But considering the application for
UAV positioning in GPS-denied environment, there is no need for large-scale
nodes (hundreds of wireless sensor nodes) for localisation. Thus, the system
cost of UWB based system can be still kept in low level.
It is concluded that the UWB based system with time-based localisation mech-
anisms is the best option for UAV positioning with RF based localisation tech-
nologies in GPS-denied environment.
5 Current Challenges on UAV Positioning with RF based Localisation
Technologies
Under the in-depth discussion and establishment of the evaluation framework for
RF based localisation systems on UAV positioning, current challenges for designing
or implementing high-performance RF based localisation system of UAV in GPS-
denied environment will be discussed in this section to act as the guidance and lay
fundamental base for subsequent research.
5.1 NLOS Error
One of the fundamental challenges for precise localisation of UAV with RF based
technologies in GPS-denied environment will be the abominable communication
environment. It is always diﬃcult to assess the communication condition, con-
sidering the dynamic characteristics of the working environment. Owing to the
inherent nature of electromagnetic waves, to avoid reﬂect, refract and diﬀract of
the communication signal between sensor nodes is impossible [15], that is where
NLOS error comes from. NLOS error here denotes the localisation error caused by
NLOS communication between sensor nodes, also treated as the excessive travel-
ling distance. To be speciﬁc, the reﬂection or refraction of the signal will lead to
the additional power loss, additional time-delay or incident angle change which all
have the signiﬁcant consequence on localisation accuracy. Moreover, the multipath
fading caused by the NLOS communication will also make it challenging to distin-
guish the direct path. To remedy this, plenty of approaches have been presented.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.29]
29
According to the method of dealing with NLOS error, these approaches can be
divided into two categories, NLOS identiﬁcation and NLOS mitigation.
The NLOS identiﬁcation means to identify the NLOS path or measurement
which are inﬂuenced by the NLOS error. In the last decade, hundreds of ap-
proaches have been developed in this area. The traditional approaches utilised
the building methods or model and the existing LOS information to identify the
NLOS path through the measured distance, signal strength or channel characteris-
tics. The identiﬁcation accuracy is relevant to the building methods or model and
the existing LOS information. Diﬀerently, the Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) based ap-
proach ﬁrst utilises the RSS or Channel State Information (CSI) training data for
feature extraction, then it is to distinguish the NLOS path. Even no identiﬁcation
model is required, however, the performance is restricted by the data volume. In
this part, a brief overview for these two diﬀerent NLOS identiﬁcation approaches
will be given.
In [102], Chan et al. proposed an identiﬁcation approach to identify NLOS path
through the designed residual test with measured TOA and successfully achieved
over 90% accuracy. However, performance of the algorithm is restricted by the
number of the base stations (anchor nodes) and LOS dimension for these nodes.
The performance will drop sharply in terms of lack of LOS anchor nodes or if
LOS dimension is under 4. Diﬀerently, another approach was proposed in [103]
which exploited TOA-DOA fusion to precise identify NLOS nodes and improve
accuracy with reﬂection points served as reference nodes. In this approach, TOA
and DOA from the same target measured by diﬀerent anchor nodes were applied
to estimate multi-group position information, then to analyse estimation bias for
distinguishing NLOS and LOS nodes. Moreover, a shared reﬂection point identi-
ﬁcation and localisation algorithm was presented to improve the positioning ac-
curacy. However, their approach has the assumption that all reﬂection must be
single bounce. Besides, the performance will be greatly restricted by accuracy of
DOA and synchronisation between nodes. Similar to the above method, Zhang
et al. [104] designed another approach which also utilised the measured angle in-
formation to transform the reﬂection points as reference nodes for localisation.
Diﬀerently, this method could identify the multi reﬂection point through calcu-
lated possible region for target node from measured AOA, Angle of Departure
(AOD) and TOA information. However, unless at least one single bounce reﬂec-
tion exists, the proposed approach is unable to identify multi reﬂection points.
Besides, not only AOA, but also AOD is required which means for both target
and anchor nodes high-performance antenna arrays are required to preserve the
accuracy.
On the other hand, some other approaches exploiting machine-learning or deep-
learning for precise identiﬁcation were also proposed. The authors in [105] applied
the non-parametric machine learning techniques for identiﬁcation with no need of
statistical characterisation for LOS and NLOS channels. Six diﬀerent features were
extracted directly from received waveform for classiﬁcation through Least Square
Support Vector Machine (LS-SVM), owing to the characteristics of robustness,
few requirements of user-deﬁned parameters and superior performance. Due to
the huge computational complexity of Support Vector Machine (SVM), Relevance
Vector Machine (RVM) was exploited in [106] to identify and mitigate NLOS error
with lower computational cost. They declared that an extremely smaller number
of Relevance Vectors (RVs) of RVM were utilised for classiﬁcation than Support
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.30]
30
Vectors (SVs) of SVM. Moreover, compared with SVM, RVM is able to estimate
error bar for the improvement of localisation accuracy. In order to further reduce
computational complexity, Yang et al. [107] proposed another NLOS identiﬁcation
approach based on Import Vector Machine (IVM). During identiﬁcation process,
a feature selection strategy was designed to select optimal feature from the same
six features to improve accuracy and reduce computational complexity. Moreover,
comparison of SVM and RVM with proposed approaches was made to evaluate
the eﬀectiveness. In order to exclude human intervention, deep-learning based ap-
proaches for NLOS identiﬁcation emerge recently. Bregar et al. [108] presented a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based approach exploiting measured raw
CIR for precise identiﬁcation. The dimensionality of CNN was also reduced by
ﬁltering useful training data as small batches to signiﬁcantly lower the complex-
ity and improve the robustness of the algorithm. On the other hand, considering
the insuﬃcient information from single measurement and limitation of CIR, Choi
et al [109] proposed another approach which applied a series of CSI to further
improve the identiﬁcation eﬃciency and accuracy by aid of Recurrent Neural Net-
work (RNN). However, all these data-aided methods are susceptible to unknown or
dynamic environment due to the requirement of plenty measurements and training
process for feature extraction. Moreover, for UAV applications, on-board identi-
ﬁcation is unrealistic owing to the limit power supply and high computational
complexity. Therefore, further research is still necessary.
Compared with NLOS identiﬁcation, NLOS mitigation is able to remedy the
lack of LOS anchor nodes problem to eliminate the inﬂuence of NLOS. The au-
thors in [110] proposed two diﬀerent convex relaxation approaches called as the
Semideﬁnite Relaxation (SDR) and the Second-order Cone Relaxation (SOCR)
to mitigate the NLOS error precisely with the ability for solving non-convexity
problem. They successfully mitigated NLOS error from measured TOA with no
need of plenty statistical information. In addition, they also extended the above
method to TDOA based localisation approach in [111]. At the same time, Marano
et al. [105], Van Nguyen et al. [106] both designed the approach for NLOS error
mitigation after identiﬁcation with SVM and RVM. However, there is still restric-
tion for NLOS mitigation. When compared with the identiﬁcation approaches that
remove NLOS nodes directly, mitigation approaches can only approximate LOS
condition even in the ideal case. Therefore, NLOS mitigation approaches are only
suitable for the applications with less LOS node exists.
5.2 Node Synchronisation
Generally, in the ideal case, the clocks on all the sensor nodes are identical. How-
ever, considering the material, structure and manufacturing process, the clock of
each sensor node is diﬀerent. Additionally, to limit the system cost, the only low
performance crystal oscillator can be provided for the wireless sensor nodes of
the RF based localisation system. Therefore, with the extremely fast speed of
electromagnetic waves, even a small diﬀerence between the local clock will have a
huge impact on the localisation accuracy, especially for the time-based localisation
mechanisms. Hence, precise synchronisation will be the other grand challenge for
precise localisation of UAV with RF based systems.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.31]
31
The current synchronisation approaches can be classiﬁed based on the method
for handling the clock diﬀerence. One is to cancel out the clock diﬀerence through
communication strategy or regulate clock diﬀerence with additional synchronisa-
tion server or node. The other is to achieve the relative synchronisation with the
estimation of clock diﬀerence. As above mentioned, the localisation approaches
such as TWR, DS-TWR and SDS-TWR all are synchronisation free which can-
cel out the clock diﬀerence by multi communication. However, the additional
problems will be raised, like response delay, communication cost and high la-
tency. The other conventional approach is leveraging additional synchronisation
server or node to regulate clock diﬀerence. Lots of classical protocols or strategies
on this side have been proposed over the past decades like Timing-sync Proto-
col for Sensor Networks (TPSN) [112], Flooding Time Synchronisation Proto-
col (FTSP) [113] and Reference-broadcast Synchronisation (RBS) [114] which are
summarised in [115–118]. Nevertheless, performance for these approaches will be
restricted by synchronisation server or node itself, also by the communication
condition and synchronisation strategy. Meanwhile, with the extra components,
energy consumption will also be the burning issue. Therefore, in this paper, we
will mainly focus on the relative synchronisation with the estimation of clock dif-
ference. The classical approach was proposed in [119] which leveraged two-way
exchange successfully estimate clock diﬀerence between sensor nodes with the
known time delay. However, only clock oﬀset is taken into account. For further
research, authors in [120] designed a synchronisation protocol called Asymmetrical
Time-stamping and Passive Listening (ATPL) utilised the same two-way exchange
strategy. Diﬀerently, passive listened message from other nodes was considered to
estimate relative clock skew and oﬀset, also to reduce communication cost. How-
ever, with the same strategy, even communication cost is reduced, but still keep
high-level. Meanwhile, LOS paths between each sensor node are required to keep
precise synchronisation. Likewise, Wang et al. [121] proposed another clock skew
and oﬀset estimation approach, which also utilised the same strategy and over-
hearing message. But diﬀerent from the aforementioned approaches, only two-way
exchange between the chosen two sensor nodes is required and no prior position
information, response time or transmit time from responder needed. Therefore,
communication cost of this approach is signiﬁcantly reduced. But LOS paths are
still required. On the other hand, Xiong et al. [122,123] proposed another robust
clock synchronisation approach which only requires periodic broadcast signal from
each anchor node to estimate relative clock skew and oﬀset. Even communication
cost is reduced compared with all the aforementioned approaches, but with the
additional communication between anchor nodes, LOS path between these nodes
must be guaranteed. For further research, Wang et al. [124] proposed a revised
synchronisation approach with unknown position information of anchor nodes fol-
lowed by Xiong’s [122,123] work, which is much more suitable for UAV localisation
in unknown environment.
5.3 Anchor Self-positioning and Relative Localisation of UAV
One of the fundamental requirements for the traditional RF based localisation
systems is adequate anchor nodes with precise location. However, consider UAV
application in GPS-denied environment, it is hard to measure the precise position
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.32]
32
information of anchor nodes before system operation. Under such circumstance,
anchor self-positioning turns into one of the most concerned research questions in
this area. In [125, 126], a source position estimation approach called Source Po-
sition Estimation for Anchor position uncertainty Reduction (SPEAR) was pro-
posed which achieved precise estimation of anchor position with existing RSS
measurements. However, prior information for some anchor nodes is still required.
Besides, the ﬁnal estimation error is not acceptable for UAV localisation. Diﬀer-
ently, Großwindhager et al. [127] designed a Single-anchor Localisation System
using Multipath Assistance (SALMA) for precise localisation. Thanks to the ex-
isting geometry for the building and the characteristics of the UWB signal, virtual
anchor nodes are able to be built up with reﬂection between transmitter and re-
ceiver for precise localisation. Finally, a median error below 8cm with oﬀ-the-shelf
UWB sensor node is garnered. However, in dynamic or unknown environment,
this approach will lose eﬀectiveness. In addition, another anchor self-localisation
approach was proposed in [128] which exploited TOA measurements sequentially
gathered from anchor nodes by moving quadcopter by hand and previous robust
solvers to estimate anchor position for UAV localisation.
Furthermore, in some extreme circumstance, like the search and rescue mission
in unknown environment, it is not only diﬃcult for anchor position measuring, but
it is also hard to deploy anchor nodes where self-localisation may lose eﬀectiveness.
To remedy this, relative localisation through cooperation of UAV swarm will be a
feasible plan. As aforementioned, authors in [67–70] from the same research group
proposed the eﬀective relative localisation approaches achieved precise localisa-
tion and formation control of UAV swarm with communication between UWB
sensor nodes. Likewise, same approaches were presented in [71] and [72], where all
achieved relative UAV localisation with anchor nodes deployed on dynamic UAV
and military vehicle. However, further development is still required to improve the
accuracy and keep stable performance in cluttered environment.
5.4 Signal Block or Interference between Localisation Server or Ground Station
and UAV
Currently, there are two patterns for RF based UAV localisation system, the oﬀ-
board pattern and on-board pattern, as shown in Fig. 2. For oﬀ-board pattern, the
localisation algorithm will be deployed on an additional localisation server (ground
station), which is responsible for the complex computing. Thus, for oﬀ-board pat-
tern, the computational complexity and the system energy consumption only have
little impact on localisation latency and UAV operation time. However, the addi-
tional process to send back the estimated position to UAV is required. Considering
the applications in GPS-denied environment, the potential signal interference or
block for the additional process may cause the position lost or low position update
rate of UAV. Moreover, to avoid signal interference or block between UAV and
ground station is not only the primary challenge for precise localisation, but also
extremely signiﬁcant for stable control of UAV.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.33]
33
5.5 Energy Consumption
As aforementioned, diﬀerent from the oﬀ-board pattern, instead of the additional
localisation server, an on-board processor will be equipped on UAV which is re-
sponsible for position estimation. Apparently, for on-board pattern, the computa-
tional complexity of the algorithm and energy consumption of the processor will
all have great inﬂuence on the operation time of UAV. To lower the energy con-
sumption, lots of approaches through diﬀerent perspectives have been proposed.
However, balance between energy consumption, computational complexity and
localisation accuracy to preserve the stability of UAV requires to be take into con-
sideration, where at least decimetre-level accuracy with high update rate should
be ensured, then to consider the lowest energy consumption to keep UAV alive for
longer time.
5.6 Unreasonable Value
Owing to the unpredictable working environment and communication condition
between all sensor nodes. Considering the measurement noise from each sensor
node is constantly changing due to the individual diﬀerence, the unreasonable
value which denotes as the ﬂuctuation of localisation results may occur. Generally,
performance degradation caused by unreasonable value is not a sustained impact.
Thus, for traditional applications, these values can be ignored directly. However,
for UAV positioning, even a short-term position drift can lead to the unstable
control. Hence, before reaction of ﬂight controller, localisation results must be
smoothed or ﬁltered to eliminate violent ﬂuctuation which makes unreasonable
values become to a special challenge for UAV positioning.
5.7 Summary and Discussion on the Current Challenges of the RF based UAV
Localisation Technologies
A detailed discussion on current solutions of the challenges for UAV localisation
with RF based localisation technologies is provided in Table 7. The advantages and
disadvantages for each solution under the consideration of the evaluation frame-
work proposed in Section 4 are also generalised which can give a clear guidance for
subsequent research. Moreover, under the comprehensive overview and discussion
for the current solutions, the potential research issues for UAV localisation with
RF based localisation technologies in GPS-denied environment are generalised as
follow to give a clear guidance for future research.
– How to keep accurate NLOS identiﬁcation with less LOS anchor nodes exist.
As discussed, the authors in [102–104] all exploited the anchor nodes which
have the LOS communication path to serve as the reference nodes for identiﬁ-
cation. Therefore, enough LOS anchor nodes are required to keep the accuracy.
However, under our application scenario, UAV is more likely to ﬂy in the un-
known, dynamic or cluttered environment where deployment of plenty of LOS
anchor nodes is diﬃcult to achieve.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.34]
34
Table 7 Discussion on current challenges for UAV positioning with RF based localisation
technologies
Current
Challenges
Current Solutions
Advantage
Disadvantage
NLOS Error
NLOS
Identiﬁcation:
Utilising
the
inherent
rule of each RF signal
to
ﬁnd
signal
chang-
ing
under
diﬀerent
communication path
Stable
performance,
immune
to
NLOS
path, implementation
simplicity
Statistical
informa-
tion
required,
lose
eﬀectiveness
with
not enough auxiliary
nodes
NLOS Mitigation: With
the appropriate mathe-
matical model to miti-
gate NLOS error
No need for any sta-
tistical
information
or
previous
data,
acceptable
accuracy
in most situation
High
computational
complexity,
unstable
under extreme case
Node
Synchronisation
Utilising communication
strategy to avoid syn-
chronisation
Implementation sim-
plicity, low computa-
tional complexity
Suﬀering
from
re-
sponse
delay
or
clock
drift,
high
communication cost
Exploiting
the
addi-
tional
synchronisation
node/server with appro-
priate
synchronisation
protocol
Implementation sim-
plicity, acceptable ac-
curacy, low computa-
tional complexity
Restricted
by
synchronisation
node/server,
high
communication cost
Estimating clock diﬀer-
ence for relative synchro-
nisation
No
additional
com-
ponents
required,
acceptable
accu-
racy
with
speciﬁc
algorithm
High
computational
complexity,
require
LOS
path
between
nodes
Anchor Self-
positioning
and Relative
Localisation
of UAV
Leveraging
auxiliary
nodes
for
anchor
self-
positioning
Implementation sim-
plicity, low communi-
cation cost
Prior information re-
quired, restricted by
auxiliary nodes, addi-
tional equipment re-
quired
With
the
appropriate
strategy for anchor self-
positioning in oﬄine pro-
cess
No prior information
required,
no
extra
equipment required
Deployment
of
an-
chor nodes required,
high
communication
cost
Relative localisation of
UAV
No
auxiliary
nodes
required
Prior information for
UAV
displacement
and velocity required,
high
computational
complexity
Signal Block
or
Interference
Additional
auxiliary
nodes
serve
as
relay
stations
Stable
communi-
cation
condition
in
harsh environment
Additional
auxiliary
nodes
required,
dif-
ﬁcult
to
implement
in unknown environ-
ment
Multi-hop
communi-
cation
with
speciﬁc
strategy
No extra equipment
required
Unstable
perfor-
mance,
high
energy
consumption
Energy
Consumption
Reduce
computational
complexity and commu-
nication cost
No extra equipment
required, easy to im-
plement with speciﬁc
algorithm, low locali-
sation latency
Localisation accuracy
degradation
Additional
localisation
server
High
accuracy
and
stable
performance,
no need to consider
energy consumption
High
latency,
suﬀer
from
signal
block
or
interference,
ad-
ditional
equipment
required, high system
cost
Unreasonable
Value
Identify
the
unreason-
able
value
with
spe-
ciﬁc algorithm like Ma-
halanobis distance
No prior information
is
required,
stable
performance
High
computational
complexity,
identiﬁ-
cation fail
Smooth the result with
mathematical model like
EKF
Implementation sim-
plicity
Impact
on
localisa-
tion
performance,
unstable
perfor-
mance,
previous
result
required,
ad-
ditional
equipment
required
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.35]
35
– Eﬃcient and accurate NLOS identiﬁcation with less data volume required.
Currently, the AI based approaches attract lots of attention in NLOS iden-
tiﬁcation, owing to the capability for precise feature comparison. Large data
volume is needed to provide enough sample for precise identiﬁcation. However,
as aforementioned, it is diﬃcult to gather plenty of data for comparison due
to the operational environment of UAV.
– Eﬀective NLOS mitigation algorithm with low computational complexity. Alone
with the introduction of the NLOS mitigation algorithm, the computational
complexity of the localisation algorithm is deﬁnitely increased which has the
dramatic eﬀect on localisation latency and operation time of UAV. The prob-
lem can be solved by additional localisation server. However, the unpredictable
signal block or interference between UAV and the localisation server will cause
the position lost of UAV.
– Precise localisation with low communication cost (for synchronisation-free al-
gorithm). As aforementioned, the synchronisation-free localisation algorithms
(TW-TOF, DS-TWR, SDS-TWR, etc.) successfully solved the node synchroni-
sation problem and achieved precise localisation at the expense of communica-
tion cost. For traditional applications, the additional communication between
sensor nodes can be ignored directly due to the low demand for position up-
date rate. But for UAV applications, the position update rate or localisation
latency is closely related to the stability of UAV. Thus, how to reduce the com-
munication cost of the synchronisation-free algorithms will be the extremely
important question for UAV positioning.
– Accurate relative synchronisation with low computational complexity and com-
munication cost. In order to estimate the relative clock oﬀset and skew, ad-
ditional communication between sensor nodes and relative synchronisation al-
gorithm are required. Thus, as discussed, the computational complexity and
additional communication cost lead by relative synchronisation algorithm will
be the factors inﬂuencing the localisation latency and position update rate of
UAV.
– How to achieve precise anchor self-localisation with less prior information and
additional equipment. Currently, the anchor self-localisation approaches still
need the prior information such as some known position anchor nodes, exist-
ing geometry for operational environment or additional equipment like smart
antenna array. However, these all will still restrict the application scenarios of
UAV, especially in dynamic or unknown environment. Thus, the precise an-
chor self-localisation with less prior information and additional equipment is
particularly important under current circumstance.
– Precise relative localisation of UAV swarm with low computational complex-
ity and robust to NLOS error. As mentioned before, the relative localisation
approaches for UAV swarm have already been implemented through the com-
munication between sensor nodes on each UAV. However, NLOS error between
sensor nodes and the problem of high computational complexity are never taken
into account in the current approaches which run counter to the application
scenario in GPS-denied environment and have the huge impact on localisation
latency. Thus, precise relative localisation of UAVs which show robustness to
NLOS error with low computational complexity is another burning issue in
this area.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.36]
36
6 Conclusion
In this paper, a comprehensive analysis and overview have been presented for the
RF based UAV localisation systems with diﬀerent radio communication technolo-
gies under diﬀerent localisation mechanisms to demonstrate the current circum-
stance of the RF based UAV localisation technologies in GPS-denied environment,
considering the missing of survey literature in the current ﬁeld. Firstly, the pros
and cons of the existing RF based UAV localisation systems with diﬀerent radio
communication technologies (Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Zigbee, RFID, UWB) were dis-
cussed. Later on, the classical localisation mechanisms (RSS, AOA, TOF/TOA,
TDOA, Fingerprint) widely used on the RF based localisation systems and the
eﬀectiveness of each for UAV positioning in GPS-denied environment were re-
viewed. Thirdly, the evaluation framework to assess the system performance was
established, aiming at the special demand for UAV positioning in GPS-denied en-
vironment. Similar to our work, a comprehensive evaluation framework has also
been established in [15], but more attention has been given to the energy eﬃciency.
As aforementioned, sensor nodes are able to power themselves with the on-board
battery which have no impact on UAV operation time. Meanwhile, considering
UAV is not a long-life system, to keep sensor nodes alive within the operation pro-
cess of UAV is enough. For the UAV application, greater emphasis should be put on
the localisation latency which is diﬀerent from the traditional applications. With
the established framework, all the RF based localisation systems with the speciﬁc
localisation mechanisms are analysed to ﬁnd the suitable application scenarios. Ac-
cording to the analysis, except the Zigbee based systems, all the other RF based
localisation systems are able to be applied on UAV positioning. Within these, the
Wi-Fi based systems with the RSS based localisation mechanisms are more suit-
able for the UAV positioning in outdoor environment. Both the Bluetooth and
RFID based localisation systems are more eﬀective for the applications on MAVs
or micro-uavs in smaller indoor environment. Particularly, the UWB based system
with the time-based localisation mechanisms are highlighted for UAV positioning
under the consideration of the proposed evaluation framework, which can be the
best option for UAV positioning with the RF based systems.
Finally, key issues and challenges for UAV positioning with the RF based sys-
tem in GPS-denied environment were discussed. According to our investigation
and comparison in Table 3, the previous surveys in [13–18] all presented the chal-
lenges for the existing localisation technologies. Especially for the authors in [14]
and [15], a comprehensive discussion and analysis for the current challenges were
provided. Nevertheless, the speciﬁc challenges for UAV positioning including Rela-
tive Localisation, Signal Block or Interference and Unreasonable Value were never
considered by Zafari et al. [15]. Singh et al. [14] only considered the basic applica-
tions on UAV. Furthermore, the current challenges including drone velocity, strong
multipath, NLOS and computational load were presented in [17] which focused on
the UAV applications. But the detailed analysis and KPIs to evaluate the per-
formance of each system or technology were never mentioned. Consequently, the
analysis and discussion on the key issues and challenges for the speciﬁc applica-
tions on UAV positioning in our work can provide some promising directions for
future research.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.37]
37
Acknowledgements This article is fully supported by Research Excellence Award studentship
from University of Strathclyde and partly supported by Low Cost Intelligent UAV Swarming
Technology for Visual Inspection project from the UK Oil & Gas Technology Centre (Grant
No. AI-P-028). The authors would also like to thank the OGTC robotics team at the Univer-
sity of Strathclyde for their kindly support especially Dr Gordon Dobie, Dr Charles MacLeod,
Mr Mark Robertson and Prof Xiutian Yan.
Declarations
Funding
This article is fully supported by Research Excellence Award studentship from Uni-
versity of Strathclyde and partly supported by Low Cost Intelligent UAV Swarm-
ing Technology for Visual Inspection project from the UK Oil & Gas Technology
Centre (Grant No. AI-P-028).
Conﬂicts of interest/Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Availability of data and material
Not applicable.
Code availability
Not applicable.
Authors’ Contributions
Beiya Yang conceived the work, performed the literature review, drafted the
manuscript and revised it critically for important intellectual content. Erfu Yang
revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual content and approved
the version to be published. All authors reviewed and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Ethics approval
This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals
performed by any of the authors.
Consent to participate
Not applicable.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.38]
38
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
References
1. Leijian Yu, Erfu Yang, Peng Ren, Cai Luo, Gordon Dobie, Dongbing Gu, and Xiutian
Yan. Inspection robots in oil and gas industry: a review of current solutions and future
trends. In 2019 25th International Conference on Automation and Computing (ICAC),
pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
2. Alok Ranjan, HB Sahu, Prasant Misra, and Bighnaraj Panigrahi. Leveraging unmanned
aerial vehicles in mining industry: Research opportunities and challenges. In Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles in Smart Cities, pages 107–132. Springer, 2020.
3. Guobing Ma, Ziyuan Tong, Minming Tong, and Shoufeng Tang. Coordinated control of
uavs for mine searching. In 2018 Eighth International Conference on Instrumentation &
Measurement, Computer, Communication and Control (IMCCC), pages 259–263. IEEE,
2018.
4. Lindsey Piercy. Could drones save cows? why uk research team thinks so. https://news.
ca.uky.edu/article/could-drones-save-cows-why-uk-research-team-thinks-so.
Accessed January 27, 2020.
5. Tiago M Fern´andez-Caram´es, Oscar Blanco-Novoa, Iv´an Froiz-M´ıguez, and Paula Fraga-
Lamas. Towards an autonomous industry 4.0 warehouse: A uav and blockchain-based
system for inventory and traceability applications in big data-driven supply chain man-
agement. Sensors, 19(10):2394, 2019.
6. Janis Tiemann and Christian Wietfeld. Scalable and precise multi-uav indoor naviga-
tion using tdoa-based uwb localization.
In 2017 International Conference on Indoor
Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), pages 1–7. IEEE, 2017.
7. Marvelmind Robotics. Marvelmind indoor navigation system operating manual, 2017.
8. Dongho Kang and Young-Jin Cha. Autonomous uavs for structural health monitoring
using deep learning and an ultrasonic beacon system with geo-tagging. Computer-Aided
Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, 33(10):885–902, 2018.
9. MS Ariﬁn, YY Nazaruddin, TA Tamba, RA Santosa, and A Widyotriatmo. Experimental
modeling of a quadrotor uav using an indoor local positioning system. In 2018 5th In-
ternational Conference on Electric Vehicular Technology (ICEVT), pages 25–30. IEEE,
2018.
10. Shady Zahran, Adel M Moussa, Abu B Sesay, and Naser El-Sheimy.
A new velocity
meter based on hall eﬀect sensors for uav indoor navigation.
IEEE Sensors Journal,
19(8):3067–3076, 2018.
11. Yanying Gu, Anthony Lo, and Ignas Niemegeers. A survey of indoor positioning systems
for wireless personal networks. IEEE Communications surveys & tutorials, 11(1):13–32,
2009.
12. Sampo Kuutti, Saber Fallah, Konstantinos Katsaros, Mehrdad Dianati, Francis Mccul-
lough, and Alexandros Mouzakitis. A survey of the state-of-the-art localization techniques
and their potentials for autonomous vehicle applications. IEEE Internet of Things Jour-
nal, 5(2):829–846, 2018.
13. Ramon F Brena, Juan Pablo Garc´ıa-V´azquez, Carlos E Galv´an-Tejada, David Mu˜noz-
Rodriguez, Cesar Vargas-Rosales, and James Fangmeyer. Evolution of indoor positioning
technologies: A survey. Journal of Sensors, 2017, 2017.
14. Ravinder Singh and Kuldeep Singh Nagla. Comparative analysis of range sensors for the
robust autonomous navigation–a review. Sensor Review, 2019.
15. Faheem Zafari, Athanasios Gkelias, and Kin K Leung. A survey of indoor localization
systems and technologies. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 21(3):2568–2599,
2019.
16. Ali Yassin, Youssef Nasser, Mariette Awad, Ahmed Al-Dubai, Ran Liu, Chau Yuen,
Ronald Raulefs, and Elias Aboutanios. Recent advances in indoor localization: A survey
on theoretical approaches and applications. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
19(2):1327–1346, 2016.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.39]
39
17. Mar´ıa Del Carmen P´erez Rubio, David Gualda G´omez, Jorge De Vicente Ranera,
Jos´e Manuel Villadangos Carrizo, Jes´us Ure˜na Ure˜na, et al.
Review of uav position-
ing in indoor environments and new proposal based on us measurements. 2019.
18. Yuncheng Lu, Zhucun Xue, Gui-Song Xia, and Liangpei Zhang. A survey on vision-based
uav navigation. Geo-spatial information science, 21(1):21–32, 2018.
19. G Balamurugan, J Valarmathi, and VPS Naidu. Survey on uav navigation in gps denied
environments. In 2016 International conference on signal processing, communication,
power and embedded system (SCOPES), pages 198–204. IEEE, 2016.
20. Wang Shule, Carmen Mart´ınez Almansa, Jorge Pena Queralta, Zhuo Zou, and Tomi West-
erlund. Uwb-based localization for multi-uav systems and collaborative heterogeneous
multi-robot systems. Procedia Computer Science, 175:357–364, 2020.
21. Chunbo Luo, Sally I McClean, Gerard Parr, Luke Teacy, and Renzo De Nardi. Uav po-
sition estimation and collision avoidance using the extended kalman ﬁlter. IEEE Trans-
actions on Vehicular Technology, 62(6):2749–2762, 2013.
22. A Masiero, F Fissore, A Guarnieri, F Pirotti, and A Vettore. Uav positioning and collision
avoidance based on rss measurements. The International Archives of Photogrammetry,
Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, 40(1):219, 2015.
23. Salil Goel, Jelena Gabela, Allison Kealy, and Guenther Retscher.
An indoor-outdoor
cooperative localization framework for uavs. In Proceedings of the International Global
Navigation Satellite Systems (IGNSS) Conference, 2018.
24. Biljana Risteska Stojkoska, Jordan Palikrushev, Kire Trivodaliev, and Slobodan Kala-
jdziski. Indoor localization of unmanned aerial vehicles based on rssi. In IEEE EURO-
CON 2017-17th International Conference on Smart Technologies, pages 120–125. IEEE,
2017.
25. Deepak Vasisht, Swarun Kumar, and Dina Katabi. Decimeter-level localization with a
single wiﬁaccess point. In 13th {USENIX} Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation ({NSDI} 16), pages 165–178, 2016.
26. Manikanta Kotaru, Kiran Joshi, Dinesh Bharadia, and Sachin Katti. Spotﬁ: Decimeter
level localization using wiﬁ.
In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Special
Interest Group on Data Communication, pages 269–282, 2015.
27. Shenghong Li, Mark Hedley, Keith Bengston, Mark Johnson, David Humphrey, Alija Ka-
jan, and Nipun Bhaskar. Tdoa-based passive localization of standard wiﬁdevices. In 2018
Ubiquitous Positioning, Indoor Navigation and Location-Based Services (UPINLBS),
pages 1–5. IEEE, 2018.
28. Chenlu Xiang, Shunqing Zhang, Shugong Xu, Xiaojing Chen, Shan Cao, George C
Alexandropoulos, and Vincent KN Lau. Robust sub-meter level indoor localization with a
single wiﬁaccess point—regression versus classiﬁcation. IEEE Access, 7:146309–146321,
2019.
29. Chen Chen, Yan Chen, Yi Han, Hung-Quoc Lai, and KJ Ray Liu. Achieving centimeter-
accuracy indoor localization on wiﬁplatforms: A frequency hopping approach.
IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, 4(1):111–121, 2016.
30. Feng Zhao, Tiancheng Huang, and Donglin Wang.
A probabilistic approach for wiﬁ
ﬁngerprint localization in severely dynamic indoor environments. IEEE Access, 7:116348–
116357, 2019.
31. Wei Sun, Min Xue, Hongshan Yu, Hongwei Tang, and Anping Lin. Augmentation of ﬁn-
gerprints for indoor wiﬁlocalization based on gaussian process regression. IEEE Trans-
actions on Vehicular Technology, 67(11):10896–10905, 2018.
32. Xiansheng Guo, Nkrow Raphael Elikplim, Nirwan Ansari, Lin Li, and Lei Wang. Robust
wiﬁlocalization by fusing derivative ﬁngerprints of rss and multiple classiﬁers.
IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 16(5):3177–3186, 2019.
33. Yuanchao Shu, Yinghua Huang, Jiaqi Zhang, Philippe Cou´e, Peng Cheng, Jiming Chen,
and Kang G Shin. Gradient-based ﬁngerprinting for indoor localization and tracking.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 63(4):2424–2433, 2015.
34. Lin Li, Xiansheng Guo, Nirwan Ansari, and Huiyong Li. A hybrid ﬁngerprint quality
evaluation model for wiﬁlocalization. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 6(6):9829–9840,
2019.
35. Wikipedia.
Bluetooth low energy.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bluetooth_Low_
Energy. [Online; accessed July 11, 2020].
36. Mengfei Zhou, Jiang Lin, Shuo Liang, Wei Du, and Long Cheng. A uav patrol system
based on bluetooth localization.
In 2017 2nd Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Intelligent
Robot Systems (ACIRS), pages 205–209. IEEE, 2017.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.40]
40
37. Pablo Ramon Soria, Andres Felipe Palomino, BC Arrue, and Anibal Ollero. Bluetooth
network for micro-uavs for communication network and embedded range only localization.
In 2017 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), pages 747–
752. IEEE, 2017.
38. Mario Coppola, Kimberly McGuire, KY Scheper, and GC de Croon. On-board bluetooth-
based relative localization for collision avoidance in micro air vehicle swarms.
arXiv
preprint arXiv, 1609, 2016.
39. Fynn Schwiegelshohn, Philipp Wehner, Florian Werner, Diana Gohringer, and Michael
Hubner.
Enabling indoor object localization through bluetooth beacons on the radio
robot platform.
In 2016 International Conference on Embedded Computer Systems:
Architectures, Modeling and Simulation (SAMOS), pages 328–333. IEEE, 2016.
40. Aswin N Raghavan, Harini Ananthapadmanaban, Manimaran S Sivamurugan, and
Balaraman Ravindran. Accurate mobile robot localization in indoor environments using
bluetooth. In 2010 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation, pages
4391–4396. IEEE, 2010.
41. Apple Inc.
ios: Understanding ibeacon.
http://support.apple.com/kb/HT6048.
Re-
trieved July 15, 2020.
42. Md Sayedul Aman, Haowen Jiang, Cuyler Quint, Kumar Yelamarthi, and Ahmed Abdel-
gawad. Reliability evaluation of ibeacon for micro-localization. In 2016 IEEE 7th Annual
Ubiquitous Computing, Electronics & Mobile Communication Conference (UEMCON),
pages 1–5. IEEE, 2016.
43. Faheem Zafari, Ioannis Papapanagiotou, Michael Devetsikiotis, and Thomas Hacker.
An
ibeacon
based
proximity
and
indoor
localization
system.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1703.07876, 2017.
44. Nokia.
High
accuracy
positioning.
https://www.dac.nokia.com/applications/
high-accuracy-positioning/. Retrieved July 15, 2020.
45. Qualcomm. Gimbal webpage. https://gimbal.com/beacons/. Retrieved July 15, 2020.
46. Paolo Baronti, Prashant Pillai, Vince WC Chook, Stefano Chessa, Alberto Gotta, and
Y Fun Hu. Wireless sensor networks: A survey on the state of the art and the 802.15. 4
and zigbee standards. Computer communications, 30(7):1655–1695, 2007.
47. Sinem Coleri Ergen. Zigbee/ieee 802.15. 4 summary. UC Berkeley, September, 10(17):11,
2004.
48. Libei Yu, Qing Fei, and Qingbo Geng. Combining zigbee and inertial sensors for quadrotor
uav indoor localization. In 2013 10th IEEE International Conference on Control and
Automation (ICCA), pages 1912–1916. IEEE, 2013.
49. Kirti Chawla, Christopher McFarland, Gabriel Robins, and Wil Thomason. An accurate
real-time rﬁd-based location system. International Journal of Radio Frequency Identiﬁ-
cation Technology and Applications, 5(1):48–76, 2018.
50. RFID4u.
How to select a correct rﬁd tag – passive vs. active.
https://rfid4u.com/
rfid-basics-resources/how-to-select-a-correct-rfid-tag-passive-vs-active/.
Retrieved July 15, 2020.
51. Jian Zhang, Xiangyu Wang, Zhitao Yu, Yibo Lyu, Shiwen Mao, Senthilkumar CG Pe-
riaswamy, Justin Patton, and Xuyu Wang. Robust rﬁd based 6-dof localization for un-
manned aerial vehicles. IEEE Access, 7:77348–77361, 2019.
52. Jian Zhang, Zhitao Yu, Xiangyu Wang, Yibo Lyu, Shiwen Mao, Senthilkumar CG Peri-
aswamy, Justin Patton, and Xuyu Wang. Rfhui: An rﬁd based human-unmanned aerial
vehicle interaction system in an indoor environment. Digital Communications and Net-
works, 6(1):14–22, 2020.
53. Jae Sung Choi, Byung Rak Son, Hee Kuk Kang, and Dong Ha Lee. Indoor localization
of unmanned aerial vehicle based on passive uhf rﬁd systems. In 2012 9th international
conference on ubiquitous robots and ambient intelligence (URAI), pages 188–189. IEEE,
2012.
54. Michela Longhi, Z Taylor, Marija Popovi´c, J Nieto, Gaetano Marrocco, and Roland Sieg-
wart. Rﬁd-based localization for greenhouses monitoring using mavs. In 2018 IEEE-
APS Topical Conference on Antennas and Propagation in Wireless Communications
(APWC), pages 905–908. IEEE, 2018.
55. Maria-Gabriella Di Benedetto. UWB communication systems: a comprehensive overview,
volume 5. Hindawi Publishing Corporation, 2006.
56. Heinrich L¨ucken.
Communication and Localization in UWB Sensor Networks.
PhD
thesis, Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, Eidgen¨ossische
Technische Hochschule Z¨urich, 2013.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.41]
41
57. Kexin Guo, Zhirong Qiu, Cunxiao Miao, Abdul Hanif Zaini, Chun-Lin Chen, Wei Meng,
and Lihua Xie. Ultra-wideband-based localization for quadcopter navigation. Unmanned
Systems, 4(01):23–34, 2016.
58. Jiaxin Li, Yingcai Bi, Kun Li, Kangli Wang, Feng Lin, and Ben M Chen. Accurate 3d
localization for mav swarms by uwb and imu fusion. In 2018 IEEE 14th International
Conference on Control and Automation (ICCA), pages 100–105. IEEE, 2018.
59. Thien Minh Nguyen, Abdul Hanif Zaini, Kexin Guo, and Lihua Xie. An ultra-wideband-
based multi-uav localization system in gps-denied environments. In 2016 International
Micro Air Vehicles Conference, 2016.
60. Michael Strohmeier, Thomas Walter, Julian Rothe, and Sergio Montenegro.
Ultra-
wideband based pose estimation for small unmanned aerial vehicles.
IEEE Access,
6:57526–57535, 2018.
61. Janis Tiemann, Florian Schweikowski, and Christian Wietfeld. Design of an uwb indoor-
positioning system for uav navigation in gnss-denied environments. In 2015 International
Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), pages 1–7. IEEE, 2015.
62. Nicola Macoir, Jan Bauwens, Bart Jooris, Ben Van Herbruggen, Jen Rossey, Jeroen Hoe-
beke, and Eli De Poorter. Uwb localization with battery-powered wireless backbone for
drone-based inventory management. Sensors, 19(3):467, 2019.
63. Weide You, Fanbiao Li, Liqing Liao, and Meili Huang.
Data fusion of uwb and imu
based on unscented kalman ﬁlter for indoor localization of quadrotor uav. IEEE Access,
8:64971–64981, 2020.
64. Zhiyuan Shi, Hanbo Li, Hezhi Lin, and Lianfen Huang. A nano-quadcopter formation
ﬂight system based on uwb indoor positioning technology. In 2018 13th International
Conference on Computer Science & Education (ICCSE), pages 1–4. IEEE, 2018.
65. Kexin Guo, Zhirong Qiu, Wei Meng, Lihua Xie, and Rodney Teo.
Ultra-wideband
based cooperative relative localization algorithm and experiments for multiple unmanned
aerial vehicles in gps denied environments. International Journal of Micro Air Vehicles,
9(3):169–186, 2017.
66. Kexin Guo, Zhirong Qiu, Wei Meng, Thien Minh Nguyen, and Lihua Xie.
Relative
localization for quadcopters using ultrawideband sensors.
In Proceedings of Interna-
tionalMicro Air Vechicle Competition and Conference (IMAV), 2016, pages 243–248,
2016.
67. Zhimin Han, Kexin Guo, Lihua Xie, and Zhiyun Lin. Integrated relative localization and
leader–follower formation control. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 64(1):20–
34, 2018.
68. Kexin Guo, Xiuxian Li, and Lihua Xie. Ultra-wideband and odometry-based cooperative
relative localization with application to multi-uav formation control. IEEE transactions
on cybernetics, 50(6):2590–2603, 2019.
69. Kexin Guo, Xiuxian Li, and Lihua Xie. Simultaneous cooperative relative localization
and distributed formation control for multiple uavs. Science China Information Sciences,
63(1):119201, 2020.
70. Kexin Guo, Duo Han, and Lihua Xie. Range-based cooperative localization with sin-
gle landmark. In 2017 13th IEEE International Conference on Control & Automation
(ICCA), pages 588–593. IEEE, 2017.
71. Shuqiang Cao, Yongbin Zhou, Dong Yin, and Jun Lai. Uwb based integrated commu-
nication and positioning system for multi-uavs close formation. In 2018 International
Conference on Mechanical, Electronic, Control and Automation Engineering (MECAE
2018). Atlantis Press, 2018.
72. Fabrizio Lazzari, Alice Buﬃ, Paolo Nepa, and Sandro Lazzari. Numerical investigation
of an uwb localization technique for unmanned aerial vehicles in outdoor scenarios. IEEE
Sensors Journal, 17(9):2896–2903, 2017.
73. Francisco Javier Perez-Grau, Fernando Caballero, Luis Merino, and Antidio Viguria.
Multi-modal mapping and localization of unmanned aerial robots based on ultra-
wideband and rgb-d sensing. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 3495–3502. IEEE, 2017.
74. Thien-Minh Nguyen, Thien Hoang Nguyen, Muqing Cao, Zhirong Qiu, and Lihua Xie.
Integrated uwb-vision approach for autonomous docking of uavs in gps-denied environ-
ments. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages
9603–9609. IEEE, 2019.
75. Janis Tiemann, Andrew Ramsey, and Christian Wietfeld. Enhanced uav indoor naviga-
tion through slam-augmented uwb localization. In 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2018.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.42]
42
76. Roy De Maesschalck, Delphine Jouan-Rimbaud, and D´esir´e L Massart. The mahalanobis
distance. Chemometrics and intelligent laboratory systems, 50(1):1–18, 2000.
77. Raul Mur-Artal, Jose Maria Martinez Montiel, and Juan D Tardos. Orb-slam: a versatile
and accurate monocular slam system. IEEE transactions on robotics, 31(5):1147–1163,
2015.
78. Raul Mur-Artal and Juan D Tard´os. Orb-slam2: An open-source slam system for monoc-
ular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 33(5):1255–1262, 2017.
79. Andrea Goldsmith. Wireless communications. Cambridge university press, 2005.
80. Long Cheng, Cheng-dong Wu, Yun-zhou Zhang, and Yan Wang. An indoor localization
strategy for a mini-uav in the presence of obstacles. International Journal of Advanced
Robotic Systems, 9(4):153, 2012.
81. Igor O Tovkach, Oleksandr S Neuimin, and Serhii Ya Zhuk. Filtration of parameters of
the uav movement based on the rss-measurement at the unknown power of the transmit-
ter. In 2018 14th International Conference on Advanced Trends in Radioelecrtronics,
Telecommunications and Computer Engineering (TCSET), pages 57–60. IEEE, 2018.
82. Tatiana Pavlenko, Martin Sch¨utz, Yassen Dobrev, and Martin Vossiek. Design of sparse
dome antenna array for angle of arrival localization systems.
In 2019 13th European
Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), pages 1–4. IEEE, 2019.
83. Tatiana Pavlenko, Martin Sch¨utz, Martin Vossiek, Thomas Walter, and Sergio Mon-
tenegro.
Wireless local positioning system for controlled uav landing in gnss-denied
environment. In 2019 IEEE 5th International Workshop on Metrology for AeroSpace
(MetroAeroSpace), pages 171–175. IEEE, 2019.
84. Phuc Nguyen, Taeho Kim, Jinpeng Miao, Daniel Hesselius, Erin Kenneally, Daniel
Massey, Eric Frew, Richard Han, and Tam Vu. Towards rf-based localization of a drone
and its controller. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Micro Aerial Vehicle Networks,
Systems, and Applications, pages 21–26, 2019.
85. Lingyan Zhang and Hongyu Wang. 3d-wiﬁ: 3d localization with commodity wiﬁ. IEEE
Sensors Journal, 19(13):5141–5152, 2019.
86. Elahe Soltanaghaei, Avinash Kalyanaraman, and Kamin Whitehouse. Multipath triangu-
lation: Decimeter-level wiﬁlocalization and orientation with a single unaided receiver. In
Proceedings of the 16th annual international conference on mobile systems, applications,
and services, pages 376–388, 2018.
87. G Rebel, J Gonz´alez, P Gl¨osek¨otter, Francisco Estevez, and Adrian Romero. A novel
indoor localization scheme for autonomous nodes in ieee 802.15. 4a networks. I Jornadas
de Computaci´on Empotrada y Reconﬁgurable (JCER2016), 2016.
88. Reza Zandian. Ultra-wideband based indoor localization of mobile nodes in toa and tdoa
conﬁgurations. 2019.
89. Approved
ieee
draft
amendment
to
ieee
standard
for
information
technology-
telecommunications
and
information
exchange
between
systems-part
15.4:wireless
medium access control (mac) and physical layer (phy) speciﬁcations for low-rate wireless
personal area networks (lr-wpans): Amendment to add alternate phy (amendment of ieee
std 802.15.4). IEEE Approved Std P802.15.4a/D7, Jan 2007, 2007.
90. Janis Tiemann, Fabian Eckermann, and Christian Wietfeld. Multi-user interference and
wireless clock synchronization in tdoa-based uwb localization.
In 2016 International
Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2016.
91. Janis Tiemann, Fabian Eckermann, and Christian Wietfeld. Atlas-an open-source tdoa-
based ultra-wideband localization system. In 2016 International Conference on Indoor
Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2016.
92. Jos´e-Luis Rull´an-Lara, Sergio Salazar, and Rogelio Lozano. Real-time localization of an
uav using kalman ﬁlter and a wireless sensor network. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic
Systems, 65(1-4):283–293, 2012.
93. Priyanka Sinha, Yavuz Yapici, and Ismail Guvenc. Impact of 3d antenna radiation pat-
terns on tdoa-based wireless localization of uavs. In IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), pages 614–619.
IEEE, 2019.
94. Marcelo N de Sousa and Reiner S Thom¨a.
Localization of uav in urban scenario us-
ing multipath exploiting tdoa ﬁngerprints.
In 2018 IEEE 29th Annual International
Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), pages
1394–1399. IEEE, 2018.
95. Xiaohua Tian, Zhenyu Song, Binyao Jiang, Yang Zhang, Tuo Yu, and Xinbing Wang.
Hiquadloc: A rss ﬁngerprinting based indoor localization system for quadrotors. IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing, 16(9):2545–2559, 2016.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.43]
43
96. Changju Kan, Guoru Ding, Fei Song, and Junfei Qiu. Eﬃcient relative ﬁngerprinting
based uav localization via tensor completion.
In 2018 IEEE 10th Sensor Array and
Multichannel Signal Processing Workshop (SAM), pages 592–596. IEEE, 2018.
97. Zacc Dukowitz.
What are gps-denied drones and why are they important?
https:
//uavcoach.com/gps-denied-drones/. Retrieved July 01, 2021.
98. Patrick Doherty and Piotr Rudol. A uav search and rescue scenario with human body
detection and geolocalization. In Australasian Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
pages 1–13. Springer, 2007.
99. Decawave.
Dwm1001 development board product brief.
https://www.decawave.com/
dwm1001dev/productbrief/. [Online; accessed July 11, 2020].
100. POZYX. Pozyx uwb sensor node product brief. https://www.pozyx.io/shop/product/
developer-tag-68. [Online; accessed July 11, 2020].
101. Eirini Karapistoli, Fotini-Niovi Pavlidou, Ioannis Gragopoulos, and Ioannis Tsetsinas. An
overview of the ieee 802.15. 4a standard. IEEE Communications Magazine, 48(1):47–53,
2010.
102. Yiu-Tong Chan, Wing-Yue Tsui, Hing-Cheung So, and Pak-chung Ching. Time-of-arrival
based localization under nlos conditions. IEEE Transactions on vehicular technology,
55(1):17–24, 2006.
103. Zhonghai Wang and Seyed A Zekavat. Omnidirectional mobile nlos identiﬁcation and
localization via multiple cooperative nodes. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing,
11(12):2047–2059, 2011.
104. Victoria Ying Zhang and Albert Kai-sun Wong. Combined aoa and toa nlos localization
with nonlinear programming in severe multipath environments. In 2009 IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2009.
105. Stefano Marano, Wesley M Giﬀord, Henk Wymeersch, and Moe Z Win. Nlos identiﬁcation
and mitigation for localization based on uwb experimental data. IEEE Journal on selected
areas in communications, 28(7):1026–1035, 2010.
106. Thang Van Nguyen, Youngmin Jeong, Hyundong Shin, and Moe Z Win. Machine learn-
ing for wideband localization.
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
33(7):1357–1380, 2015.
107. Xiaofeng Yang, Feng Zhao, and Tiejun Chen. Nlos identiﬁcation for uwb localization
based on import vector machine. AEU-International Journal of Electronics and Com-
munications, 87:128–133, 2018.
108. Klemen Bregar and Mihael Mohorˇciˇc. Improving indoor localization using convolutional
neural networks on computationally restricted devices.
IEEE Access, 6:17429–17441,
2018.
109. Jeong-Sik Choi, Woong-Hee Lee, Jae-Hyun Lee, Jong-Ho Lee, and Seong-Cheol Kim.
Deep learning based nlos identiﬁcation with commodity wlan devices. IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, 67(4):3295–3303, 2017.
110. Gang Wang, H Chen, Youming Li, and Nirwan Ansari. Nlos error mitigation for toa-based
localization via convex relaxation.
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
13(8):4119–4131, 2014.
111. Gang Wang, Anthony Man-Cho So, and Youming Li.
Robust convex approximation
methods for tdoa-based localization under nlos conditions. IEEE Transactions on Signal
processing, 64(13):3281–3296, 2016.
112. Saurabh Ganeriwal, Ram Kumar, and Mani B Srivastava. Timing-sync protocol for sensor
networks.
In Proceedings of the 1st international conference on Embedded networked
sensor systems, pages 138–149, 2003.
113. Mikl´os Mar´oti, Branislav Kusy, Gyula Simon, and ´Akos L´edeczi. The ﬂooding time syn-
chronization protocol. In Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Embedded
networked sensor systems, pages 39–49, 2004.
114. Jeremy Elson, Lewis Girod, and Deborah Estrin. Fine-grained network time synchroniza-
tion using reference broadcasts. ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review, 36(SI):147–
163, 2002.
115. Bharath Sundararaman, Ugo Buy, and Ajay D Kshemkalyani. Clock synchronization for
wireless sensor networks: a survey. Ad hoc networks, 3(3):281–323, 2005.
116. Fikret Sivrikaya and B¨ulent Yener. Time synchronization in sensor networks: a survey.
IEEE network, 18(4):45–50, 2004.
117. DD Geetha and Nikhath Tabassum.
A survey on clock synchronization protocols in
wireless sensor networks. In 2017 International Conference On Smart Technologies For
Smart Nation (SmartTechCon), pages 504–509. IEEE, 2017.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
[p.44]
44
118. Linh-An Phan, Taejoon Kim, Taehong Kim, JaeSeang Lee, and Jae-Hyun Ham. Perfor-
mance analysis of time synchronization protocols in wireless sensor networks. Sensors,
19(13):3020, 2019.
119. Kyoung-Lae Noh, Qasim Mahmood Chaudhari, Erchin Serpedin, and Bruce W Suter.
Novel clock phase oﬀset and skew estimation using two-way timing message exchanges
for wireless sensor networks. IEEE transactions on communications, 55(4):766–777, 2007.
120. Sundeep Prabhakar Chepuri, Raj Thilak Rajan, Geert Leus, and Alle-Jan van der Veen.
Joint clock synchronization and ranging: Asymmetrical time-stamping and passive lis-
tening. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 20(1):51–54, 2012.
121. Heng Wang, Haiyong Zeng, Min Li, Baoguo Wang, and Ping Wang. Maximum likelihood
estimation of clock skew in wireless sensor networks with periodical clock correction under
exponential delays. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 65(10):2714–2724, 2017.
122. Hui Xiong, Zhiyuan Chen, Wei An, and Beiya Yang. Robust tdoa localization algorithm
for asynchronous wireless sensor networks. International Journal of Distributed Sensor
Networks, 11(5):598747, 2015.
123. Hui Xiong, Zhiyuan Chen, Beiya Yang, and Rongpei Ni. Tdoa localization algorithm
with compensation of clock oﬀset for wireless sensor networks. China Communications,
12(10):193–201, 2015.
124. Tan Wang, Hui Xiong, Hong Ding, and Linhua Zheng. Tdoa-based joint synchronization
and localization algorithm for asynchronous wireless sensor networks. IEEE Transactions
on Communications, 68(5):3107–3124, 2020.
125. Marko
Angjelichinoski,
Daniel
Denkovski,
Vladimir
Atanasovski,
and
Liljana
Gavrilovska. Spear: Source position estimation for anchor position uncertainty reduc-
tion. IEEE communications letters, 18(4):560–563, 2014.
126. Marko
Angjelichinoski,
Daniel
Denkovski,
Vladimir
Atanasovski,
and
Liljana
Gavrilovska.
Cram´er–rao lower bounds of rss-based localization with anchor position
uncertainty. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 61(5):2807–2834, 2015.
127. Bernhard Großwindhager, Michael Rath, Josef Kulmer, Mustafa S Bakr, Carlo Alberto
Boano, Klaus Witrisal, and Kay R¨omer. Salma: Uwb-based single-anchor localization
system using multipath assistance. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Em-
bedded Networked Sensor Systems, pages 132–144, 2018.
128. Kenneth Batstone, Magnus Oskarsson, and Kalle ˚Astr¨om. Towards real-time time-of-
arrival self-calibration using ultra-wideband anchors. In 2017 International Conference
on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2017.
A Survey on Radio Frequency based Precise Localisation Technology for UAV in GPS-denied Environment
=== END ===
