warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1459.pdf
sha256: 8A232BC4716F77191D915143382FAF7DFBE301004FB353B340C70139E81B6BB2
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 11
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Title
Automatic UAV inspection of tunnel infrastructure in GPS-denied
underground environment
Authors
Zhang, Ran;Ouyang, Aohui;Li, Zili
Publication date
2022-06-16
Original Citation
Zhang, R., Ouyang, A. and Li, Z. (2022) ‘Automatic UAV inspection
of tunnel infrastructure in GPS-denied underground environment’,
in Rizzo, P. and Milazzo, A. (eds) European Workshop on
Structural Health Monitoring. EWSHM 2022. Lecture Notes in
Civil Engineering, vol 254, pp. 519-526. Springer, Cham. doi:
10.1007/978-3-031-07258-1_53
Type of publication
Conference item
Link to publisher's
version
10.1007/978-3-031-07258-1_53
Rights
© 2022, the Authors, under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG. This is a post-peer-review, pre-copyedit version
of an article published in Lecture Notes in Civil Engineering.
The final authenticated version is available online at: https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07258-1_53
Download date
2026-09-17 18:28:19
Item downloaded
from
https://hdl.handle.net/10468/13359
[p.2]
 
Automatic UAV Inspection of Tunnel Infrastructure in 
GPS-denied Underground Environment 
Ran Zhang1, Aohui Ouyang1,2 , Zili Li1,2 
1 University College Cork, Cork T12 K8AF, Ireland 
2 Irish Centre for Research in Applied Geosciences (iCRAG), Ireland 
120224104@umail.ucc.ie 
 
Abstract.  In the Architecture, Engineering and Construction (AEC) industry, 
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) has been widely acknowledged as a promising tool to 
perform adaptive structural health monitoring automatically. However, there still 
remains some challenges for drones to collect image data of underground structures, 
primarily due to low light and no GPS conditions. In order to facilitate data acquisition, 
this article developed a mobile software development kit (MSDK) for drone using visual 
positioning and predefined controlling code, which enabled the drone to automatically 
fly along a designated sinusoidal route, whilst continuously taking videos and images of 
the tunnel surface. The developed MSDK was able to adjust the drone parameters (e.g., 
overlapping rate, inspection range, heading, flight direction between frames of the 
video) for different underground infrastructure conditions. Furthermore, a field test is 
conducted in an abandoned windless tunnel near Cork (Goggins Hill Tunnel) to test its 
feasibility. Results show that the 40-m difference between the designated routine and 
actual routine was 1.9%, and the collected data processed by Pix4Dmapper could 
reconstruct the complete tunnel scene and surface details. The navigation method 
proposed in this paper allows UAVs to perform automatic inspection without GPS, and 
the collected image data is used to build a tunnel panorama view. 
Keywords: UAV Inspection, Tunnel inspection, Automated Flight, GPS-denied 
environment, Video Stitching. 
 
1 
Introduction 
To facilitate infrastructure asset assessment and maintenance, it is essential to 
monitor the health condition of ageing infrastructures on a regular basis. Compared with 
[p.3]
 
manual inspection, the use of unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) for structural surface 
inspection can gather more image data with lower labour cost. On top of that, due to 
high image quality and well controlled acquisition routes, the gathered digital data can 
be processed with artificial intelligence algorithms, enabling quantitative evaluation or 
measurements of structure defects. Furthermore, regular drone inspections could 
facilitate infrastructure structural health maintenance and reveal the infrastructure 
deterioration. 
Over the years, although drones have been widely adopted for structural surface 
inspection, the positioning and control of drones rely on GPS+GLONASS positioning. 
In other words, extant investigations usually employ drones to inspect the structure with 
either good luminosity or GNSS availability in open air, such as road, pavement and 
building exterior. Zakeri[1] developed a drone inspection method to take images of 
asphalt pavement . In similar dark and weak GPS condition around bridge, Fujiuchi[2] 
proposed a method of visual positioning with the help of searchlights, which can reach 
an error of 0.12m and 15m. For tunnel images, various artificial intelligence navigation 
algorithm has been developed[3], [4]. 
However, the drone inspection of tunnel surface still faces many challenges. 
Compared with the open-air condition, the dark environment in confined underground 
tunnel space without GPS positioning signal is not suitable for UAV flight, owning to 
the decrease of drone manipulation precision and automatic flight interference from 
intrados. The researchers are still looking for stable navigation[5], [7] and data 
acquisition method in this harsh environment [8]. Others resort to railcars [8] and ground 
robots [9] equipped with cameras for image data acquisition, alternatively. Nevertheless, 
such specialized equipment and the associated installation cost is usually expensive and 
only enables inspection along programmed route with limited adaptability, which hardly 
cover a complex underground infrastructure network including inclined tunnel, cross 
passage, shaft and etc. 
To this end, this paper proposed a UAV automatic data acquisition method with 
the help of visual positioning, which further developed the Mobile SDK of DJI UAV 
(https://developer.dji.com/mobile-sdk/) to control the UAV flight following a 
designated trajectory. The developed method enables a drone to automatically fly along 
a tunnel at a given distance, whilst taking a video of the tunnel surface. In the light of a 
complex tunnel network, the drone flight route can be flexibly programmed and fine-
tuned to cater for different underground sections (e.g., shaft, cross passage) The 
[p.4]
 
recorded video can be used for 3D point cloud reconstruction of the 3D tunnel 
infrastructure. Based upon an advanced deep learning algorithm, the defects in the 3D 
point cloud tunnel model can be automatically detected and classified. 
2 
Autonomous drone inspection in a GPS denied underground 
environment 
2.1  Autonomous flight system 
 
Figure 1.  Autonomous drone inspection procedures 
Due to the lack of GPS positioning signal, UAV rely on visual positioning for navigation 
in underground environment. In this case, the biggest challenge for drone inspection in 
dark tunnels becomes lack of luminance. Only with natural or artificial light, an UAV 
can perform inspection autonomously based on a MSDK. The MSDK is designed for 
typical straight railway tunnel and the operating procedures are described (see Fig. 1). 
It’s an integration of in-built visual positioning and SDK programming. The in-built 
visual positioning stabilizes the drone's location in relative to the tunnel wall by its six 
[p.5]
 
pairs of visual sensors, whilst the SDK programme plan a time-dependent drone flying 
route. Based upon a prior tunnel map with dimension details, the drone routine can be 
first programmed prior to inspection. The pre-flight route design is not completed until 
operator’s site supervision and judgments. At the site, the drone operator gives refined 
parameter setting. 
2.2  Flight trajectory setting 
Conventionally, the drone inspection of civil infrastructure usually follows a grided-
shaped in a rectangle area. In a low-illuminance underground tunnel, however, such 
several pieces of long-distance inspection bring risks of dislocation for video stitching.  
To this end, a novel flight trajectory is developed in this study (see Fig. 2): it shows 
a one-way sinusoidal continuous flight path. In Fig. 2 (1), the black sinusoidal curve 
represents the trajectory of the camera in longitudinal and vertical direction. The camera 
views at two peaks of movement are represented as red and blue rectangles. The UAV 
is programmed to make movement with constant distance to tunnel walls. 
To ensure that all the inspected surfaces are covered in a single flight, there has to 
be enough overlap area rate α between two adjacent peaks and valleys of the curve in 
the recorded video. Eq. 1 defines the determination of Dhmax. 
𝐷𝐷ℎ𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚< (2 −α) ∗ W 
(1) 
Dhmax is the horizontal spacing of the camera in the peak positions. W is scene width 
in a single frame. α is overlapping rate (say 60% for rough inspection). A satisfactory α 
could be achieved by setting Dhmax by Eq.1.  
Scene width W can be measured on site or calculated by Eq.2. 
W = tan ൬Θ
2൰∗2D
(2) 
Θ represents the field of view (say 63° for Mavic 2). D represents the distance between 
the lens and the wall. In Goggins Hill Tunnel the tunnel diameter is 5.8 m. To keep a 
large inspection area, the D could be chosen roughly between 2.9 m and 5.5 m.
[p.6]
 
 
Figure.2 Drone flying route (1) by setting parameters and (2) in conventional practice 
The above formulas help operators to determine all four parameters in the MSDK. 
Inspectors can input the four following parameters to the user interface (see Fig.3) 
knowing tunnel dimensions. Besides, the pair of buttons called enable and disable virtual 
stick is a switch of controlling mode between manual and automatic. Another pair of 
buttons called start and stop flight control is a switch of sinusoidal motion. During the 
inspection task, the drone's sinusoidal motion command signal is sent every 20 ms and 
stabilized by visual positioning. 
The parameter called yaw is the direction of the heading of drone in the North-
East-Ground (NED) coordinate system. It’s limited to a range of [-180, 180] degrees. 
When yaw equals 0, the drone points to the North. Since this system relies on compass, 
it works in abandoned tunnels where there’s no electromagnetic field interference. 
The parameter called height is the maximum height of the flight path, which must 
be set lower than the height of the tunnel crown, whilst the minimum height is fixed to 
be 0.5 m to keep safe.  
The parameter called period is the period of sin function. To meet the overlapping 
requirement, the period is set as 5 seconds here.  
The last parameter called pitch defines horizontal velocity, which gives around 
0.17 m/s horizontal velocity when set pitch as 0.3 as default. When horizontal flight 
speed is modified to negative, the UAV can move forward and backward longitudinally. 
 
After setting the parameters and enabling autonomous flight system, the operators 
need to follow the drone and keep it in sight before the inspection task ends. After each 
inspection, the acquired data could be sent to Pix4Dmapper for a quick check. 
According to tunnel conditions and error types in the quality report, the operators make 
adjustments to the above parameters. 
(1) 
(2) 
[p.7]
 
 
Figure. 3 UI design of MSDK 
3 
Field test in Goggins Hill Tunnel 
To test the feasibility of the proposed method, a field test was conducted in Goggins Hill 
Tunnel. It’s a straight-wall-arch tunnel with a maximum diameter of 5.8 m and height 
of 5.2 m measured by laser range finder. Two parts of the tunnel are inspected in this 
field test. One is a bright tunnel section close to the entrance and is 38.2 m long; the 
other is a dark tunnel section and is 45.5 m long. For the safety of drone inspection, the 
drone flies Between 1.2 m and 3.5 m height. And to cover most of the surface in one 
inspection, the drone flies at a distance of 5 m aways from the inspected wall. 
The Mavic 2 Enterprise Dual (M2ED) needs to work in front of surface with clear 
pattern and adequate lighting (lux > 15). Luminance at the entrance of tunnel in this 
inspection comes from natural light. But in the inner dark part of tunnel, the only light 
source is from spotlight of M2ED on top of the drone. It’s luminance is 11 lux @ 30m 
Straight max and has 17° field of view (FOV), which is too narrow for use at close range. 
To evit detail loss caused by high contrast between directly lighted area and the rest, the 
[p.8]
 
appropriate luminosity in dark tunnel is set at round 10% and verified. 
After a drone inspection, the video data records several videos along the tunnel 
structure. A video enables satisfactory overlapping rate in adjacent frames and makes 
registration more accurately than using discrete images. One key frame is extracted from 
every three (in bright tunnel) or five (in dark tunnel) frame images in the videos 
according to need. A primary examination of flying route and video quality is done in 
software Pix4Dmapper. The quality report gives the position of calibrated camera (see 
Fig. 4). Then the extracted frames are stitched together for a three-dimensional model 
reconstruction of the inspected tunnel surface ( see Fig. 5 and Fig.6). 
 
 
Figure. 4 Computed image positions with links between matched images in (1) bright tunnel 
and (2) dark tunnel (black means more point matches for registration) 
 
 
Figure. 5 3D output models in (1) bright tunnel and (2) dark tunnel 
(1) 
(2) 
[p.9]
 
 
Figure. 6 Texture of a segment of reconstructed tunnel in bright tunnel 
There’s some loss of information during video stitching. In bright tunnels 989 out of 
1000 of the frames are calibrated, and in dark tunnels the number becomes 1287 out of 
1969. Those uncalibrated frames are at the start and end of inspection and are missing 
data. This is inevitable data loss due to limited overlapping at the ends of the flying 
routes. The solution is to perform inspection with 5 m margin at the start and the end of 
the route.  
 From Fig.4, the error of flight route could be calculated. For bright tunnel, the 
vertical flying error equals to around 1.7%, and this value for dark tunnel equals to 1.9 
%. From Fig.5, the front view and side view of two cases are shown. Basically, the 
models keep the configuration of the tunnel. And from side view, the information of arc 
and curvature on tunnel wall is restored.  
In the two models, there’s more details of bricks in the bright tunnel compared to 
the dark tunnel. That’s due to a better natural light condition in the former inspection. 
In a dark tunnel, the only light resource is from the spotlight, which leads to a high 
contrast between the camera center and edges and also detail loss.  
In general the geometry of dark tunnel conforms to the reality. In Fig.5 (b) a 
separation of two tunnel segements appears in the output. That’s due to the difference 
on two tunnel sections. The left part is reinforced section, which has smaller diameter 
than the right part of normal brick structure. During the flight the camera was facing the 
wall, and didn’t get enough detail of the joint part, leading to such disconnection. This 
phenomenon indicates the necessity of future work on increasing the FOV of spotlight 
[p.10]
 
for inspection in dark tunnel. 
4 
Conclusion 
An autonomous drone inspection MSDK was developed and field test was performed to 
verify the method. From the quality report, the flying route has an acceptable vertical 
error of 1.7% and 1.9%. From the output of the reconstructed model, the geometry and 
texture on a total of 3 m height and 30 m length of inspected tunnel surface is restored.  
In the next step, the tunnel defects (e.g., crack and leakage) in the 3D point cloud 
model can be automatically detected and classified using an advanced deep learning 
algorithm. The automatic classification and analysis of defects in a large-scale tunnel 
infrastructure will deepen the understanding of tunnel deterioration condition and 
mechanism.  
References 
1. 
Zakeri, H. Nejad, F. M. and Fahimifar, A.: Rahbin: A quadcopter unmanned aerial 
vehicle based on a systematic image processing approach toward an automated 
asphalt pavement inspection, Autom. Constr., 72, 211–235 (2016). 
2. 
Fujiuchi, K. and Toda, H.: Autonomous 4-rotor Helicopter 10 m-range Movement 
Control System by Using Two Search Lights and the Evaluation, DEStech Trans. 
Comput. Sci. Eng., no. aics, (2017). 
3. 
Li, H. Savkin, A. V. and Vucetic, B.: Collision Free Navigation of a Flying Robot 
for Underground Mine Search and Mapping, In: 2018 IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO), pp. 1102–1106. Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia (2018).  
4. 
Petrlík, M. Báča, T. Heřt, D. Vrba, M. Krajník, T. and Saska, M.: A Robust UAV 
System for Operations in a Constrained Environment’, IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., 
5 (2), 2169–2176 (2020). 
5. 
Mansouri, S. S. Kanellakis, C. Kominiak, D. and Nikolakopoulos, G.: Deploying 
MAVs for autonomous navigation in dark underground mine environments, Robot. 
Auton. Syst., 126, 103472 (2020). 
6. 
Kanellakis, C. Mansouri, S. S. Castaño, M. Karvelis, P. Kominiak, D. and 
Nikolakopoulos, G.: Where to look: a collection of methods forMAV heading 
correction in underground tunnels, IET Image Process., 14(10), 2020–2027 (2020). 
7. 
Li, D. et al.: A Visual-Inertial Localization Method for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
[p.11]
 
in Underground Tunnel Dynamic Environments, IEEE Access, 8, 76809–76822 
(2020). 
8. 
Stent, S. A. I. Girerd, C. . Long, P. J. G and Cipolla,R.: A Low-Cost Robotic System 
for the Efficient Visual Inspection of Tunnels, p. 8. 
9. 
Hosotani, K. Yamamoto, H.: Free-Flow Tunnel Inspection Support Devices Aiming 
at Labor Saving of Visual Checking, J. Robot. Mechatron., 32 (4), 832–839 (2020). 
 
=== END ===
