warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1463.pdf
sha256: 0DD28CC5A69DA8D054CB9894F8F5CEFD3A170E27E2153E074514F6AE0F205E8A
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 11
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
This may be the author’s version of a work that was submitted/accepted
for publication in the following source:
Zhu, Xiaolong, Vanegas Alvarez, Fernando, & Gonzalez, Luis Felipe
(2022)
Decentralised Multi-UAV Cooperative Searching Multi-Target in Cluttered
and GPS-Denied Environments.
In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE Aerospace Conference (AERO).
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., United States of
America.
This ﬁle was downloaded from: https://eprints.qut.edu.au/226555/
© 2022 IEEE
Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all
other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for
advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribu-
tion to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
Notice: Please note that this document may not be the Version of Record
(i.e. published version) of the work. Author manuscript versions (as Sub-
mitted for peer review or as Accepted for publication after peer review) can
be identiﬁed by an absence of publisher branding and/or typeset appear-
ance. If there is any doubt, please refer to the published source.
https://doi.org/10.1109/AERO53065.2022.9843665
[p.2]
Decentralised Multi-UAV Cooperative Searching
Multi-Target in Cluttered and GPS-Denied
Environments
Xiaolong Zhu
Faculty of Engineering
Queensland University of Technology
2 George St, Brisbane, QLD 4000
xiaolong.zhu@hdr.qut.edu.au
Fernando Vanegas
Faculty of Engineering
Queensland University of Technology
2 George St, Brisbane, QLD 4000
f.vanegasalvarez@qut.edu.au
Felipe Gonzalez
Faculty of Engineering
Queensland University of Technology
2 George St, Brisbane, QLD 4000
felipe.gonzalez@qut.edu.au
Abstract—In recent years, the use of multi-unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) systems in outdoor GPS enabled environments
has increased signiﬁcantly. Their use in GPS-denied environ-
ments, however, is still a complex task.
Examples of such
environments include search and rescue inside buildings or
collapsed building scenarios, urban or natural canyons, in which
the GPS signal is limited or blocked.
In order to provide a
possible solution for these applications, this paper presents a
multi-UAV system that can be utilised for a team of UAVs to
autonomously navigate, search and detect multiple targets in a
cluttered and GPS-denied environment. The multi-UAV system
uses a decentralised framework based on Decentralised Partially
Observable Markov Decision Processes (Dec-POMDP) to for-
mulate the decision-making process considering uncertainties in
the environments and sensing. This system was designed for a
mission that needs to cooperate efﬁciently to search and ﬁnd
multiple targets, without knowing possible locations, by sharing
limited vital observations through WiFi connection. The system
was tested in several cluttered and GPS-denied environments
simulated in Gazebo and ROS interface. The environments were
populated with different numbers and types of obstacles, several
targets, a team of UAVs and boundaries. After comparing three
different searching strategies, the results show that the system is
capable of cooperatively searching and ﬁnding multiple targets
in an effective approach while without having a collision in
a complex environment.
The multi-UAV system is robust to
uncertainties in target exploration and localisation, enabling the
use of multiple UAVs to enhance critical missions for challenging
scenarios such as search and rescue or exploration and disaster
management and assessment.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
2. BACKGROUND . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
3. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
5. PROBLEM FORMULATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
6. RESULTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6
7. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
BIOGRAPHY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
978-1-6654-3760-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
1. INTRODUCTION
The use of multiple unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for
activities such as real-time monitoring, Search and Rescue
(SAR), remote sensing, cargo delivery, precision agriculture,
and infrastructure inspection has lately received more atten-
tion [1–5]. UAVs have been explored for SAR operations due
to their manoeuvrability (ﬂying at different speeds, hovering,
and agile access to small places), making them ideal for
potentially hazardous or challenging tasks for humans [6].
The research on multiple UAVs for SAR missions can be
broadly classiﬁed into two categories: (i) swarm systems,
which consist of a large number of smaller drones with lower-
quality sensors and a lower level of autonomy [7], and (ii)
cooperative systems, which consist of a few larger UAV
platforms with more sensors and more powerful on-board
processors that enable more complex on-board decisions than
smaller drones [2, 8]. There is a substantial amount of study
on SAR missions using a single UAV in GPS-denied settings
[9–12]. In comparison, utilising a team of UAVs to efﬁciently
and cooperatively locate a target in congested and GPS-
denied environments remains a difﬁcult challenge.
This focuses on the problem of using a team of UAVs for
a SAR mission to explore and locate multiple targets within
a building structure.
This multi-UAV indoor search for
multiple targets can be divided into three distinct problems:
indoor exploration, multi-UAV cooperation, and multi-target
ﬁnding. Each UAV must be capable of estimating its own
position within the ﬂight area while accommodating all nec-
essary uncertainties regarding its location and motions in the
absence of GPS calibration. The multi-UAV system must be
efﬁcient and collision-free in order to locate all setup targets
while maintaining the system’s scalability and reliability.
The main contributions of this paper are:
1. A scalable decentralised POMDP formulation for sim-
ulating a multi-target exploring mission involving a group
of UAVs in GPS-denied environments with obstacles in the
presence of uncertainty. This formulation enables the man-
agement of a variable number of targets without incurring the
computational cost associated with an additional target, as the
formal POMDP formulation does.
2. This paper proposes method which achieves a combina-
tion a assisted localisation function with robust obstacles
avoidance function to provide the location of UAV without
GPS signals.
1
[p.3]
2. BACKGROUND
Control Architecture
A multi-UAV system consists of intelligent agents or UAVs
as autonomous entities which make decisions according to
information of interaction and communication among them-
selves and with the environment. The control architecture of
a multi-agent system (MAS) is deﬁned by interaction within
each agent [13]. Most frameworks of a MAS are divided
into two major categories: centralised or decentralised ar-
chitecture [14, 15]. The utilities and requirements of a MAS
determine the designed control architecture.
Centralised MAS—A centralised system is composed of a
central controller or agent for the whole system and other
executive agents. The central controller is capable of com-
municating and accessing to gain all necessary information or
data from other agents in order to process and make decisions
for all the agents in the system [14]. In multi-UAV applica-
tions, a ground control station (GCS) is the central controller
in this multi-UAV system, gathers data from onboard sensors
mounted on UAVs, then sends ﬂight commands to all UAVs
through communication to complete tasks. It is evident that
the centralised one could make an optimised decision from
the system level to ensure the efﬁciency and collaboration of
the system when performing tasks . However, the costs of the
optimal decision are a stable, unobstructed communication
within all the agents in the system and a high demand for
computational performance in the central controller. Thus, a
centralised MAS has an outstanding performance in limited
applications in the real world.
Decentralised MAS—A decentralised system does not have a
central controller compared with the centralised one. Instead,
there are separate controllers in a MAS for making decisions
for one or a group of agents. This provides the beneﬁts for the
system, which are less or no constraint on communication,
less demanding for computational source and ﬂexibility of
scalability [14]. These characteristics prove that the system is
more robust and scalable in the number of agents and is able
to tolerate communication issues, even in an unconnected
circumstance.
MDP and POMDP
Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a widely used mathe-
matical framework to model sequential decision making in
stochastic domain [16]. An MDP framework aims to obtain
a policy or a strategy from a given reward function, which
is designed to ﬁlter an optimal action from predetermined
actions at a particular decision point depending on detected
observation and state of the agent.
However, the MDPs
framework requires the agent can gain a complete observation
at each decision point, which is a demanding restriction for its
applications.
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDP)
extend from MDPs to be able to contain the incomplete obser-
vational capabilities of agents and to consider the inaccurate
or insufﬁcient observations from sensors and environments as
stochastic items in the model. Formally, a POMDP is a tuple
described as < S, A, T, Ω, O, R, γ > [16], where:
• S is a set of all the environment states for the agent;
• A is the set of all possible actions of the agent;
• T(s, a, s
′) is the probability of agent in state s
′ ∈S after
performs an action a ∈A at previous state s ∈S, which
equals with Pr(s
′|s, a);
• Ωis the set of all possible observations;
• O(s
′, a, o) is the probability of observing o ∈Ωat state s
′
after performed the action a;
• R is the set of rewards for each chosen action a at every
state s;
• γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount factor.
The actual state of the agent, known as the belief-state b(s),
is described by a probability distribution for all the possible
states in agent state-space at the decision time, due to b(s)
cannot be directly observable from the tuple.
Due to the
Markov assumption, it can be updated with a Bayesian ﬁlter
for every action–observation pair:
b
′(s
′) = ηΩ(s
′, a, o)
X
s∈S
T(s, a, s
′)b(s)
(1)
where η acts as a normalising constant such that b
′ remains a
probability distribution.
The objective of a POMDP is to ﬁnd a policy that maps beliefs
into actions in the form π(b) →a, so that the total expected
reward is maximised.
This expected reward gathered by
following π starting from belief b is called the value function:
V (b) = E
" h
X
t=0
γt X
s∈S
R(s, π(bt))bt(s)|b0 = b
#
(2)
Therefore, the optimal policy π∗is the one that maximises
that value function: π∗(b) = arg max
a V (b).
Multi-Agent POMDP
A multi-agent POMDP framework is an extension from
a single agent POMDP framework in order to model the
MAS for sequential decision making under uncertainty in
a partially stochastic and partially observable environment.
Formally, a multi-agent POMDP can be deﬁned as a tuple
< I, S, A, T, O, O, R, γ, h > [17], where:
• I is a ﬁnite set of n agents, i ∈I ;
• S is a (ﬁnite) set of all the environment states for the agents;
• A is the set of joint actions: A = ×i∈IAi, Ai is the set of
available actions of i-th agent, which can be unique for each
agent;
• T is a set of state transition probabilities: T = S×A×S →
[0, 1], the probability of transitioning from previous state s ∈
S to current state s
′ ∈S when set of joint actions⃗a ∈A are
taken by each agent. Hence, T(s,⃗a, s
′) = Pr(s
′|s,⃗a);
• O is the set of joint observations: O = ×i∈IΩi, Ωi is a set
of observations available to i-th agent;
• O is the observation probability function: O = O ×
A × S →[0, 1], the probability of seeing the set of joint
observations⃗o ∈O given the set of joint actions⃗a ∈A were
taken which results in state s
′ ∈S, Hence, O(⃗o,⃗a, s
′) =
Pr(⃗o|s
′,⃗a);
• R is the reward function: R = S × A →R, the immediate
reward maps state s ∈S and performing the set of joint
actions⃗a ∈A and is used to specify the goal of the agents;
• γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount factor for the reward function R;
• h is the horizon, which the problem terminates at the
number of steps after current state.
2
[p.4]
The goal in a MAS POMDP problem formulation is to
calculate an optimal joint policy⃗π∗= {π1, · · · , πn} that
maximises the accumulated discounted reward via the reward
function (R) as in process in the POMDP model.
The Multi-agent POMDP model can be used for both MAS
control architectures, centralised or decentralised. The De-
centralised POMDP (Dec-POMDP) is where each agent in
a decentralised MAS is to compute its own optimal policy
πi at its local belief bi with its local observations Ωi and
actions Ai. The Dec-POMDP model has more ﬂexibility of
the various grades of communication, from none to perfect
and between indirect and direct [17, 18]. The characteristics
of the Dec-POMDP model provides a much broader suitable
formulation for real-world problems.
However, the cost
for a Dec-POMDP model to calculate the optimal policy is
severely unaffordable for robots, especial for weight limited
UAVs. Despite much research that have been done to de-
velop advanced optimal or approximate policy algorithms and
simplify the models for speciﬁc utilities [17–19], the nature
of computational complexity of the model remains NEXP-
complete [19]. In addition the complexity of the model surges
in an exponentially way when adding an extra agent in the
MAS [18,19]. The intractable computational cost restricts the
complexity of the formulation and renders the utilities within
simple theoretical cases instead of real-world applications.
3. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
In this paper, we present a scalable, decentralised multi-UAV
system for navigating and exploring ﬁnding multiple targets
in cluttered environments under UAV position and target
uncertainty without access to GPS/GNSS signals. The UAVs
in the proposed decentralised MAS use the identical small-
size quad-copter platform with onboard downward facing
cameras and multi-orientation range sensors. The objective
of the system is for UAVs to effectively search and detect all
the targets in the search area by using a downward camera on
each UAV. The ﬂy areas are illustrated in Figure 1, two/three
different industrial-ofﬁce-like layouts with several walls and
obstacles. The number of targets is provided to the system,
while the localisations of all targets is uncertain.
All the
targets are static, placed on the ground and tagged by different
ArUco markers for each target. As the typical ﬂight time of
a small-size UAV with an onboard computer is in the range
of 15 to 20 minutes, a maximum ﬂight time of 720 seconds
is speciﬁed as a safety margin. The search mission will fail if
the UAVs group cannot ﬁnd all the targets in the area within
the maximum ﬂight time.
UAVs are separately deployed from outside of ﬂight areas.
All UAVs will take off simultaneously after initialising on-
board sensors and communication connections, then hover for
a couple of seconds to calibrate the drift error of the IMU, as
described in Section 4. The initial drift of localisation in the
process of hovering for calibration for each UAV generates
an initial uncertainty in the UAV’s position and orientation.
This initial uncertainty is modelled as a normal probability
distribution in the system.
We designed an assistant position subsystem for each UAV
to reduce the accumulated errors and drift in IMU over time
which has two mechanisms. The ﬁst one is that when a UAV
ﬂies close to an obstacle, boundary or a wall, the onboard
ranger sensor provides a reference distance to that obstacle or
boundary to calibrate the position and orientation data from
IMU. This mechanism only works once in a period of time
Figure 1. The demonstration of scenario two in
simulation environment.
(30 seconds) and helps each UAVs to reduce the accumulated
error in localisation. There second mechanism to eliminate
the position drift after a period of ﬂight uses the downward
camera; once the downward camera of a UAV detects the
ArUco marker and the target in its ﬁeld of view (FOV),
an algorithm from the ArUco package, which is based on
Mixed Integer Linear Programming for camera to fast and
robustly generate estimate pose and location of the marker
[20], provides an estimated speed and orientation of the
current position drift based on the static target while the ﬂight
control subsystem of UAV executes hovering at the exact
location. It is assumed that ﬂight conditions remain constant
and that there is no wind to disrupt UAV ﬂight performance.
In the SAR mission, the multi-UAV system requires each
UAV to be able to avoid collisions with obstacles or other
UAVs. The different orientation of the onboard range sensors
help the UAV to avoid collisions with obstacles or boundaries,
while all the UAVs try to ﬂy at different altitudes in order to
avoid collision with each other by broadcasting their altitudes
through the communication network. One key feature of the
proposed system, is that it can handle an unstable, noisy and
disconnected network (e.g. WiFi or radio) which is a common
phenomenon in large cluttered environments.
4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
A decentralised and modular multi-UAV framework was
developed .
The framework can be extended for multiple
modular single-UAV in order to ensure the characteristics
of Dec-MAS (e.g.
scalability and redundancy) [21], as
illustrated in Figure 2. Each UAV system is subdivided into
four subsystems, each of which contains a variety of modules.
Parallel implementation of a single-UAV subsystem in a
multi-UAV framework is enabled by the Robotic Operative
System (ROS), serving as the interface and connection. These
modules communicate via ROS topics that are published and
subscribed.
The four subsystems that comprise a UAV framework are as
follows: the Mission Planning Subsystem, which determines
the optimal ﬂight actions; the Observation Subsystem, which
integrates all onboard sensor observations; the Localisation
Subsystem, which estimates the position and orientation of
the UAVs in the ﬂight space; and the Information Exchange
Subsystem, which facilitates the sharing and receiving of
observations within the MAS.
3
[p.5]
`
i-th UAV
`
2nd UAV
`
Network
Motion 
Planner 
Module
Flight 
Controller 
(PX4)
UAV /
Gazebo
IMU 
Odometry
Octomap 
Server
Observation 
Fusion 
Module
Ranger 
Sensor
Downward 
Camera
Collision 
Avoidance
Module
Target 
Detection
Module
Observation 
Exchange 
Module
Mission Planning 
Subsystem
Localisaon Subsystem  
Observaon Subsystem
Informaon 
Exchange 
Subsystem
Assisting 
Position 
Module
Map
Observation 
Procseeing 
Module
1st UAV
Figure 2. The Int-Dec POMDP Multi-UAV system architecture.
Mission Planning Subsystem
A critical component of an autonomous system is the Mission
Planning Subsystem. Its primary function is to determine the
next action based on the current optimal policy computed
from the decision-making model and currently available in-
formation. In the proposed framework, the Mission Planning
Subsystem consists of a Motion Planner Module and a Flight
Controller. The Motion Planner Module makes use of the
TAPIR [22], a fast online solver for large and continuous state
space POMDP that makes use of the Adaptive Belief Tree
(ABT) algorithm [22], to determine the optimal policy for the
decentralised POMDP model (described in Section 5). PX4,
an open-source versatile ﬂight control unit (FCU), is a widely
used ﬂight controller in autonomous UAV systems [23]. Not
only does the PX4 provide PID ﬂight control for a variety of
UAV types, including multi-rotor, ﬁxed-wing, and VTOL, but
it also includes a high-precision IMU for inertial odometry
and a barometer for ﬂight altitude estimation. Additionally,
PX4 supports Software In the Loop (SITL) simulation in the
Gazebo via ROS as a simulation layer with communication
interfaces (MAVLink) between the Motion Planner Module
and onboard sensors.
Observation Subsystem
The Observation Subsystem is in charge of all data collected
from the environment via various onboard sensors.
This
subsystem comprises three major modules and their asso-
ciated sensors: the Observation Fusion Module, the Target
Detection Module equipped with a downward camera, and
the Collision Avoidance Module equipped with six differently
oriented ranger sensors.
The Observation Fusion Module
transforms and fuses the data collected by the Observa-
tion Fusion Module into the format required by the Motion
Planner Module. Additionally, the processed observation is
combined with the UAV’s global location and/or the global
position of a detecting target as determined by the Localisa-
tion Subsystem. To recognise the ArUco markers, a monoc-
ular camera conﬁgured according to the Arducam IMX477
High Quality motorised focus camera module is downward
mounted on the bottom of the UAV. This camera has a
resolution of 1440∗1080 and a horizontal FOV of 87◦. When
a marker exposes within the camera’s valid FOV, the Target
Detection Module will compute the distance and direction
of the detected ArUco marker in the UAV local frame using
the ArUco library. Meanwhile, six close-range laser sensors
are mounted on the UAV in six directions to ensure collision
avoidance during ﬂight. As the typical distance between the
rotors of a small size UAV (e.g 80 cm in our experiments) ,
the Collision Avoidance Module is conﬁgured to maintain a
safe distance (30 cm in our experiments) between the UAV’s
rotors and the nearest object by reading data from all the
range sensors at a rate of 10 Hz.
Localisation Subsystem
The purpose of this subsystem is to provide an estimated
position and orientation of the UAV when it is not receiv-
ing GPS signals.
It is composed of the IMU Odometry,
the Assisting Position Module, and an Octomap Server that
contains a known occupancy map of the ﬂying area. The
3D occupancy map is constructed using the environment
map in order to visualise the obstacles and boundaries in the
probability approach for the Octomap Server [24].
With-
out GPS signals, the IMU Odometry in PX4 provides a
4
[p.6]
primary onboard estimated location of the UAV, which has
lost accuracy over time due to drift and accumulated error.
The Assisting Position Module is intended to mitigate and
calibrate IMU drifts and cumulative errors.
This module
makes use of the precise distance between the UAV and
obstacles or boundaries obtained via ranger sensors and the
UAV’s current possible global position to refer to the given
map, compensating for the UAV’s accumulated position error
throughout the mission. Meanwhile, IMU drift is determined
by the horizontal distance between the UAV frame and an
ArUco marker.
When the Flight Controller believes the
UAV is in a stable hover state following takeoff or during
any step to detect the tag by a steady hover, the Assisting
Position Module computes the actual movement to eliminate
the drift error from the IMU. All of these methods reduce the
position uncertainty of the UAV in the Octomap Server, and
the Octomap Server provides other modules with calculated
global location data.
Information Exchange Subsystem
The Information Exchange Subsystem, which is the critical
and innovative component of the entire system, consists of
two main modules (the Observation Processing Module and
the Observation Exchange Module).
These two modules
extract, simplify, and share observed pivotal information with
other UAVs in a designed uniform manner via the commu-
nication network at a constant frequency (0.5 Hz), while
also receiving and decoding messages (such as the number
of detected targets and explored area of the ﬂight space)
published by other numbers.
We use a WiFi network to
connect all of the signal UAV systems in the MAS. The Ob-
servation Processing Module is intended to provide a uniﬁed
approach for processing simple, distinct shared observation
data. Each UAV system has a protocol that divides the map
of the ﬂight area into a probability grid map with the same
granularity as a previously used discrete state space. Each cell
in the grid map is assigned a unique identiﬁer (ID) in order
to maintain a uniﬁed cognition in the multi-UAV system.
The Observation Processing Module simpliﬁes the process
of sharing observations by checking data from the Motion
Planner Module to ﬁlter fully complete explored or nearly
complete explored grids (over 95% of their area) and sending
their IDs to the Observation Exchange Module along with
the number of detected targets and their positions on the grid
map. The Observation Processing Module updates simpliﬁed
observations at a rate of (0.5 Hz), the same as the information
exchange rate. To avoid UAV-to-UAV collisions, this module
constantly monitors the ﬂight altitudes of other UAVs on the
network. The module provides an observational input to the
Motion Planner Module in order to prevent the UAV from
ﬂying at the same altitude as other UAVs.
5. PROBLEM FORMULATION
As described in Section 2, due to the computational com-
plexity of the formal Dec-POMDP and its numerous ex-
tensions [18, 19], it is economically impractical for an on-
board computer to solve the entire problem, particularly
for multi-target search and rescue, even when using state-
of-the-art Dec-POMDP solving algorithms.
In this paper
we propose an integrated Dec-POMDP (Int-Dec-POMDP)
model to solve the multiple targets ﬁnding problem described
in Section 3.
The model is based on the formal single
agent POMDP which has been extended and modiﬁed to
solve this task.
The Int-Dec-POMDP model is improved
and expanded upon from our previous work [5] in order to
strike a balance between the computational cost of optimal
Table 1. The Sets of Search and Avoidance Actions
Search Actions as
Avoidance Actions aa
Fly forward
Avoid backward
Fly upward
Avoid upward
Fly downward
Avoid downward
Turn leftward
Avoid leftward
Turn rightward
Avoid rightward
Hovering
policy computation and the complexity of the formulation
implemented in the real world. The Int-Dec-POMDP is a
tuple < I, {Sd, St}, A, T, {Ωl, Ωg}, O, R, γ, h >.
State Variables ({Sd, St})
I represents the ﬁnite set of the identiﬁcation of UAVs in the
multi-agent system. In order to contain the complexity for the
multi-target task, we propose that the state of each UAV can
be deﬁned with two separate parts:
• the UAV (drone) state Sd =< i, Pr, Vm, dc, tf > presents
the state of the UAV and all the relevant setting parameters
for the UAV;
• the target state St =< n, Pe, Pt > describes the state with
targets.
In the UAV state Sd, i is the UAV identiﬁcation in the
multi-UAV system, Pr = {xr, yr, zr, ψr} are the position
and orientation of this UAV in the world frame, Vm =
{vx, vy, vz, vψ} represent the airborne longitudinal, lateral,
vertical, and yaw velocities in the UAV frame, safety distance
dc = {dfront, drear, dleft, dright, dup, ddown} are obtained
from laser ranger sensors in six directions, and the airborne
manoeuvre period in the system is tf = 1 sec.
We proposed the target state St for maintaining the system
state space in the same complexity and being implemented
on a onboard computer, instead of using the normal approach
of formal POMDP [25].
In the the target state tuple <
n, Pe, Pt >, the number of all the targets is n; Pe = {xe, ye}
represents the possible position of all targets (not for any
speciﬁc target) in the process of exploration, which is used
to distinguish the unexplored area in the entire space; and
Pt = {xt, yt, zt, ψt} are assigned the actual position and
orientation of the target when UAV has detected a target, and
this detected target state can represent the localisation of all
the targets via Monte Carlo sampling method [26].
Actions (A)
In this formulation, the UAV’s ﬂying actions are deﬁned as its
longitudinal, lateral, vertical, and yaw movements. The set of
actions A is divided into two categories, which are detailed in
Table 1: search actions as and avoidance actions aa. To avoid
a rapid change in the UAV’s ﬂight state, all of the activities
summarised in Table 2 are performed at a constant velocity.
As a result, the IMU’s precision can be maintained for an
extended period. The onboard ranger sensors must detect an
object inside the speciﬁed safety distance before performing
one of the avoidance actions. The Motion Planner Module
will then select the reverse avoidance action necessary to
avoid a collision.
5
[p.7]
Table 2. The Sets of Search and Avoidance Actions
Action a
Longitudinal
Lateral
Vertical
Yaw
Velocity
Velocity
Velocity
Velocity
vx (m/s)
vy (m/s)
vz (m/s)
vψ (◦/s)
Fly forward
1.5
0
0
0
Fly upward
0
0
0.6
0
Fly downward
0
0
-0.6
0
Turn leftward
0
0
0
30
Turn rightward
0
0
0
-30
Hovering
0
0
0
0
Avoid backward
-1.0
0
0
0
Avoid upward
0
0
0.6
0
Avoid downward
0
0
-0.6
0
Avoid leftward
0
1.0
0
0
Avoid rightward
0
-1.0
0
0
Observations ({Ωl, Ωg})
The observations Ωin the system is divided into two compo-
nents:
Local Observation (Ωl)—This information is obtained via the
local onboard sensors of each UAV, which include the status
of target detection in the presence of uncertainty, the position
of the detected target within the FOV of the camera, the ID
of the explored grid, the status of avoidance mode (in order
to maintain the UAV’s safety space from an object), and the
distance from surrounding obstacles on the map.
Global Observation (Ωg)—The global observation from other
UAVs is supplied as a shared message, including only the
most valuable and simpliﬁed observation information via
system communication. A shared global observation message
contains the following information:
the total number of
detected targets, the global positions of all detected targets
in the grid map corresponding to the detected UAV ID, the
most recently explored grid ID corresponding to the searching
UAV ID, and the IDs of all explored grids.
Transition Function (T)
The transition function (T) models the UAV dynamic re-
sponse to motion commands that are represented as the step
inputs.
In order to represent the i-th UAV dynamics, a
kinematic model is described as follows:
Pr(t + 1)
=
Pr(t) + Tr(t) △Pr(t)
(3)
△Pr(t)
=
Vm(t) △t + Pwt(t)
(4)
In the above equations, Tr(t) is the dynamic change matrix
at time step t, Pr(t) is the position of i-th UAV in the world
frame at time step t and Pwt(t) = {xwt(t), ywt(t), 0, ψwt(t)}
is the pose uncertainty during the ﬂight. The position of each
UAV is determined by calculating the change in position due
to its current velocity (Equation 3), which is controlled by
the motion planner module and is selected according to the
commanded action. A transformation from the UAV’s frame
to the world frame is also calculated in these equations [27].
Reward Function (R)
The reward or cost values in the reward function are used
to tune the solver in the system in order to force the UAV
to follow the pattern of actions proposed. At each step, the
Table 3. Reward Function Sets
Status & Actions
Reward/Cost Value
Set A
Set B
Set C
Detecting a target
300
300
300
Exploring a grid
100
100
100
Hitting an obstacle
-100
-300
-300
Out of region
-100
-300
-300
Search actions
-10
-10
-10
Hovering
-30
-30
-30
Avoidance actions
-10
-10
50
reward function is composed of the following components:
(i) the reward for locating the target and exploring a new grid
on the map, (ii) the penalty for colliding with an obstacle or
ﬂying outside of operational space, and (iii) the cost of each
manoeuvre. Three value sets of the reward function are listed
in Table 3 to compare the multi-UAV system’s navigation
and obstacle avoidance capabilities. These value sets include
different penalties for colliding with an obstacle, a boundary
or other UAVs and different costs for an avoidance action.
Due to the fact that hovering reduces the efﬁciency of a SAR
mission, the cost of hovering is higher than the cost of other
search actions.
Uncertainty
The system’s three primary sources of uncertainty are the lo-
calisation uncertainty of the UAVs during ﬂight , the location
uncertainty of the targets, and the uncertainty associated with
shared observations via the communication.
Localisation of UAVs—The uncertainty in the location of each
UAV in this formulation consists of two parts: (i) the uncer-
tainty in localisation of system once it is initialised (on the
x −y plane) is Pwd = {xwd, ywd, 0, ψwd}, in the process of
initialisation, represented by a Gaussian probability distribu-
tion (µ = 0.0m, σ = 0.2m); (ii) the UAV’s pose uncertainty
after executing an action: Pwt = {xwt, ywt, 0, ψwt}, which
is also described by the Gaussian distribution (µ = 0.0m,
σ = 0.2m) & (µ = 0.0◦, σ = 5.0◦). We assume all the
altitude data from PX4 is accurate for the system through the
ﬂight. These localisation uncertainty values are updated via
the transition function.
Position of Targets —The position uncertainty of the target
St = {Pe, Pt} are represented by the same uniform distribu-
tion in the formulation.
Exchanged Observation—Since the threshold for an explored
cell in the grid map is 95% (as mentioned in Section 4), there
is some uncertainty in shared observations regarding explored
grids. We use a sample ﬁlter to retain the 5% of state samples
within the informed grid as the uncertainty of the exchanged
observation.
6. RESULTS
Three types of experiments were conducted to evaluate and
analyse the proposed multi-UAV system’s performance. We
use a simulation environment comprised of ROS, Gazebo,
PX4 SITL, and Rviz. Figure 3 illustrates the two scenarios
(S1 & S2) used in the simulations. Each simulated scenario
contains two different sets of target locations (denoted by red
6
[p.8]
(a)Scenario one (S1), with target locations P and Q.
(b)Scenario two (S2), with target locations P and Q.
Figure 3. Simulation environments with two unique
scenarios.
crosses in the ﬁgure and by ArUco markers in the Gazebo
simulation ). A team of UAVs take off from the grey cells at
the bottom of the image and ﬂy through the green ﬂy area in
search of all targets while avoiding collisions with the blue
obstacles. To ensure precise detection of the ArUco marker,
each UAV’s maximum ﬂight altitude was limited to 4.5 m.
Experiment One
The purpose of this experiment is to compare the effect of
various combinations of reward/cost values. The collision
rate results are summarised in Table 4, which includes 25 runs
for each scenario using four UAVs to locate targets at position
P. The collision rate indicates how many times all UAVs in the
team collided with an obstacle, a boundary wall, or another
UAV during a single mission.
It is evident that scenario
two is more cluttered than scenario one, as indicated by the
collision rates of each reward set in Table 4. When compared
to Set A, the collision rates of reward values Set B and Set C
are signiﬁcantly lower. This demonstrates that increasing the
penalty for a collision in the reward function contributes to
the creation of a safe path when a UAV performs a task. The
distinction between Set B and Set C is that the avoidance
actions are either rewards or costs in the reward function, and
the close-to-zero results of Set C demonstrate the utility and
robustness of the collision avoidance function.
Table 4. Summary of Collision Rate
Reward Function
Scenario
Collision Rate
Set A
S1
36 %
Set A
S2
44 %
Set B
S1
8 %
Set B
S2
12 %
Set C
S1
0 %
Set C
S2
4 %
Table 5. Summary of Success Rate of All Targets
Detected
Target Position Set
Scenario
Success Rate
P
S1
90%
Q
S1
95%
P + Q
S1
80%
P
S2
70%
Q
S2
75%
P + Q
S2
55%
Experiment Two
The mission success rate and ﬂight time were compared in
both scenarios using three target position sets.
Each case
consisted of twenty runs using a four-UAV system for reward
Set C. Table 5 compares target detection rates for all cases.
Overall, the results of scenario one are superior to those
of scenario two. As can be seen, scenario two’s layout is
signiﬁcantly larger and more complex than scenario one’s,
and scenario two requires UAVs to spend more time exploring
to locate all targets.
In both scenarios, the UAV team’s
success rate in detecting eight targets in position P & Q is
signiﬁcantly lower than in detecting four targets in positions
P or Q.
The Figure 4 illustrates the time required to locate all setting
targets in both scenarios. Overall, it is clear that the proposed
multi-UAV system took longer to detect all targets in scenario
one than it did in scenario two, owing to the complexity and
size difference of the test environments. The primary differ-
ences between the results for ﬁnding four targets (located at
P or Q) and eight targets (located at P & Q) in both scenarios
are that the median time required to ﬁnd more targets was
signiﬁcantly longer, and the interquartile range (IQR) was
also noticeably wider. This is expected, as the area explored
to locate eight targets is more extensive than the area explored
to locate four targets. Meanwhile, the set positions for the
same number of targets had a moderate effect on the results
in various scenarios.
Experiment Three
The purpose of this experiment is to determine the effect of
the team size on the performance metric (time to ﬁnd all
targets) of the proposed multi-UAV system. This case study
was repeated 15 times with four different groups of UAVs
in order to locate all targets placed at location P in scenario
one.
The number of UAVs in each of these four groups
was increased from two to ﬁve to demonstrate the multi-
UAV system’s scalability. According to the results shown
in Figure 5, as the number of UAVs increases, the average
time required to ﬁnd all targets decreases with a decreasing
7
[p.9]
P+S1
Q+S1 P+Q+S1
P+S2
Q+S2 P+Q+S2
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time to Find the All Targets (sec)
Figure 4. Time to ﬁnd all targets for both scenarios for
three sets of target locations.
Two-UAV
Three-UAV
Four-UAV
Five-UAV
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time to Find the All Targets (sec)
Figure 5. Time of different numbers of UAVs in the team
to ﬁnd four targets located at P in scenario one (S1).
trend, from 640.5 sec to 342.9 sec. As can be seen, increasing
the number of UAVs in a two-UAV system increases system
performance by 37.4 % while decreasing the average search
time by 10.2 % when comparing a four-UAV system to a
ﬁve-UAV system under the same simulated condition. This
decrease in improvement in res lutes indicates that increasing
the number of UAVs does not improve the performance of
the multi-UAV system linearly and becomes marginal as the
number of UAVs increases.This trend creates the issue of
having too many UAVs in the system, which increases the
danger of collision, energy consumption, and system cost
signiﬁcantly, while performance and efﬁciency improve just
marginally.
7. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK
This article described an approach and framework for multi-
UAV system search in an indoor environment without the use
of GPS/GNSS. By utilising the proposed Int-Dec-POMDP as
the underlying model, the framework is able to account for
formulation uncertainties while maintaining the beneﬁts of a
multi-agent system. The extended observation and observa-
tion exchange subsystems are essential and new features that
enable the system to maintain scalability and collaboration
while containing computing complexity.
Additionally, this paper proposes a combined approach
for assisting navigation and localisation in the absence of
GPS/GNSS signals, as well as for robust collision avoidance.
Moreover, a contrast test of different sets of reward values in
the reward function is simulated to demonstrate the collision
avoidance function’s inﬂuence and robustness.
The paper’s primary contribution is a demonstration of how
the proposed framework may be used to perform MAS for
multi-target search in a GPS-denied environment in an ef-
ﬁcient and collision-free manner. The computation cost of
the proposed multi-UAV system is within the capabilities of
onboard processors, which is not possible when using formal
Dec-POMDP formulations.
Additional research avenues include identifying and integrat-
ing a cost-effective Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
(SLAM) system within the architecture of a multi-UAV sys-
tem. Additionally, real-world experiments can be conducted
to demonstrate the framework’s adaptability by examining
other limitations on communication network systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the Australian Research Council and
Queensland University of Technology for funding this project
(When every second counts: Multi-drone navigation in GPS-
denied environments). The ﬁrst author would to acknowledge
scholarship support from DATA61, CSIRO. We thank Dr.
Hanna Kurniawati for the open source software TAPIR that
was used as the online POMDP solver in this paper.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. J. Acevedo, B. C. Arrue, and A. Ollero, “Cooperative
Search, Reconnaissance, Surveillance,” in Unmanned
Aircraft Systems.
John Wiley & Sons, 2016, no. 2017,
p. 383.
[2]
Z. Kashino, G. Nejat, and B. Benhabib, “Multi-
UAV based autonomous wilderness search and rescue
using target iso-probability curves,” in International
Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS),
2019, pp. 636–643.
[3]
H. Shakhatreh, A. Sawalmeh, A. Al-Fuqaha, Z. Dou,
E. Almaita, I. Khalil, N. S. Othman, A. Khreishah, and
M. Guizani, “Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: A Survey
on Civil Applications and Key Research Challenges,”
arXiv:1805.00881, pp. 1–58, Apr 2018.
[4]
O. Walker, F. Vanegas, and F. Gonzalez, “A framework
for multi-agent UAV exploration and target-ﬁnding in
GPS-denied and partially observable environments,”
Sensors (Switzerland), vol. 20, no. 17, pp. 1–23, 2020.
[5]
X. Zhu, F. Vanegas, F. Gonzalez, and C. Sanderson, “A
Multi-UAV System for Exploration and Target Finding
in
Cluttered
and
GPS-Denied
Environments,”
in
2021 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft
Systems
(ICUAS).
IEEE,
jun
2021,
pp.
721–
729. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/9476820/
[6]
C. T. Recchiuto and A. Sgorbissa, “Post-disaster as-
sessment with unmanned aerial vehicles:
A survey
8
[p.10]
on practical implementations and research approaches,”
Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 459–490,
2018.
[7]
S. Perez-Carabaza, E. Besada-Portas, J. A. Lopez-
Orozco, and J. M. de la Cruz, “Ant colony optimization
for multi-UAV minimum time search in uncertain do-
mains,” Applied Soft Computing, vol. 62, pp. 789–806,
Jan 2018.
[8]
Y. Tian, K. Liu, K. Ok, L. Tran, D. Allen, N. Roy,
and J. P. How, “Search and rescue under the forest
canopy using multiple UAVs,” The International Journal
of Robotics Research, vol. 39, no. 10-11, pp. 1201–
1221, 2020.
[9]
W. Youn, H. Ko, H. Choi, I. Choi, J. H. Baek, and
H. Myung, “Collision-free Autonomous Navigation
of A Small UAV Using Low-cost Sensors in GPS-
denied Environments,” International Journal of Control,
Automation and Systems, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 953–968,
2021.
[10] T. Dang,
F. Mascarich,
S. Khattak,
H. Nguyen,
H. Nguyen, S. Hirsh, R. Reinhart, C. Papachristos, and
K. Alexis, “Autonomous Search for Underground Mine
Rescue Using Aerial Robots,” in 2020 IEEE Aerospace
Conference.
IEEE, mar 2020, pp. 1–8.
[11] F. Vanegas, K. J. Gaston, J. Roberts, and F. Gonzalez,
“A Framework for UAV Navigation and Exploration
in GPS-Denied Environments,” in IEEE Aerospace
Conference, Mar 2019, pp. 1–6.
[12] F. J. Perez-Grau, R. Ragel, F. Caballero, A. Viguria,
and A. Ollero, “An architecture for robust UAV navi-
gation in GPS-denied areas,” Journal of Field Robotics,
vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 121–145, 2018.
[13] Y. Rizk, M. Awad, and E. W. Tunstel, “Decision Making
in Multiagent Systems: A Survey,” IEEE Transactions
on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, vol. 10,
no. 3, pp. 514–529, 2018.
[14] S. S. Ponda, L. B. Johnson, A. Geramifard, and J. P.
How, “Cooperative Mission Planning for Multi-UAV
Teams,” in Handbook of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles,
K. P. Valavanis and G. J. Vachtsevanos, Eds.
Dor-
drecht: Springer Netherlands, 2015, pp. 1447–1490.
[15] G. Skorobogatov, C. Barrado, and E. Salam´ı, “Multiple
UAV Systems: A Survey,” Unmanned Systems, vol. 8,
no. 2, pp. 149–169, 2020.
[16] W.
Burgard,
D.
Fox,
and
S.
Thrun,
Probabilistic robotics.
The MIT Press, 2005.
[17] F.
A.
Oliehoek
and
C.
Amato,
A Concise Introduction to Decentralized POMDPs,
ser. SpringerBriefs in Intelligent Systems.
Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2016.
[18] C. V. Goldman and S. Zilberstein, “Decentralized
control of cooperative systems:
Categorization and
complexity analysis,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research, vol. 22, pp. 143–174, 2004.
[19] D. S. Bernstein, “Complexity analysis and optimal al-
gorithms for decentralized decision making,” Ph.D. dis-
sertation, University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2005.
[20] S. Garrido-Jurado,
R. Mu˜noz-Salinas,
F. Madrid-
Cuevas,
and R. Medina-Carnicer,
“Generation of
ﬁducial
marker
dictionaries
using
Mixed
Integer
Linear Programming,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 51,
no.
October,
pp.
481–491,
mar
2016.
[Online].
Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0031320315003544
[21] X. Zhu, F. Vanegas, and F. Gonzalez, “An Approach
for Multi-UAV System Navigation and Target Finding
in Cluttered Environments,”
in 2020 International
Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS).
IEEE, sep 2020, pp. 1113–1120. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9214062/
[22] D. Klimenko, J. Song, and H. Kurniawati, “TAPIR:
A software Toolkit for approximating and adapting
POMDP solutions online,” in Australasian Conference
on Robotics and Automation, ACRA, vol. 02-04-Dece,
2014.
[23] L. Meier, D. Honegger, and M. Pollefeys, “PX4: A
node-based multithreaded open source robotics frame-
work for deeply embedded platforms,” in International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2015,
pp. 6235–6240.
[24] A. Hornung, K. M. Wurm, M. Bennewitz, C. Stachniss,
and W. Burgard, “OctoMap: an efﬁcient probabilistic
3D mapping framework based on octrees,” Autonomous
Robots, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 189–206, apr 2013.
[25] Y.
Zhao,
X.
Wang,
C.
Wang,
Y.
Cong,
and
L. Shen, “Systemic design of distributed multi-UAV
cooperative decision-making for multi-target tracking,”
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, vol. 33,
no. 1-2, pp. 132–158, mar 2019. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10458-019-09401-5http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/s10458-019-09401-5
[26] P. Doshi and P. J. Gmytrasiewicz, “Monte Carlo
Sampling
Methods
for
Approximating
Interactive
POMDPs,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research,
vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 297–337, mar 2009. [Online].
Available:
https://jair.org/index.php/jair/article/view/
10592
[27] F. Vanegas Alvarez and L. F. Gonzalez, “Uncertainty
based online planning for UAV target ﬁnding in
cluttered and GPS-denied environments,”
in 2016
IEEE Aerospace Conference, vol. 2016-June.
IEEE,
mar
2016,
pp.
1–9.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7500566/
BIOGRAPHY[
Xiaolong Zhu is a current PhD can-
didate at the School of Electrical Engi-
neering and Robotics(EER), Faculty of
Engineering, of Queensland University
of Technology.
He holds an MEng in
Aeronautical Engineering from Beihang
University and a BEng in Aircraft De-
sign and Engineering from Xi’an Jiao-
tong University.
His current research
focuses on motion planning for multi-
UAV exploration in GPS-denied and cluttered environments.
9
[p.11]
Fernando Vanegas is a Research Fellow
in Robotics at Queensland University of
Technology. He holds a M.Sc. in Electri-
cal Engineering from Halmstad Univer-
sity and a PhD in Aerial Robotics from
QUT. He has developed frameworks for
UAV mission planning in GPS-denied
environments for navigation, target ﬁnd-
ing and tracking purposes using ma-
chine learning techniques based on rein-
forcement learning and optimal sequential decision making.
His current research interests include motion planning for
UAV exploration in GPS-denied and cluttered environments,
POMDP, SLAM and Visual Odometry.
Felipe Gonzalez is a Professor at
the School of Electrical Engineering
and Robotics(EER), Engineering Fac-
ulty with a passion for innovation in the
ﬁelds of aerial robotics and automation.
Gonzalez interest is in creating aerial
robots, drones or UAVs that possess a
high level of cognition using efﬁcient
on-board computer algorithms using ad-
vanced optimisation and game theory
approaches that assist us to understand and improve our
physical and natural world. Professor Gonzalez leads the
Airborne Sensing Lab at QUT. He is the co-author of several
books in UAV based remote sensing and UAV based design
based on evolutionary optimisation and game strategies and
as of 2021 has published nearly 155 refereed papers.
10
=== END ===
