warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0138.pdf
sha256: BE2CF51256FC33CF1765AA2CE81A0AD432EBC5D5C7B0B064398DD79DF5EED71E
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 12
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 68, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019
1339
Autonomous Exploration and Mapping System Using
Heterogeneous UAVs and UGVs in
GPS-Denied Environments
Hailong Qin, Zehui Meng
, Wei Meng
, Xudong Chen, Hao Sun, Feng Lin, and Marcelo H. Ang
Abstract—In this paper, we present a novel integrated vehicular
system using collaborative unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and
unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs) for autonomous exploration,
mapping, and navigation in GPS-denied 3-dimensional (3-D) un-
known environments. The system implements a novel two-layered
exploration strategy to decompose the perception task into a coarse
exploration layer and a ﬁne mapping layer. The coarse exploration
makes use of a UGV to carry out fast autonomous exploration
and active 2.5D simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
to generate a coarse environment model, which serves as a navi-
gation reference for subsequent complementary 3-D ﬁne mapping
conducted by a UAV. The two layers share a novel optimized explo-
ration path planning and navigation framework, which provides
optimal exploration paths and integrates the collaborative explo-
ration and mapping efforts through an OctoMap-based volumetric
motion planning interface. The proposed system provides an efﬁ-
cient pipeline of fast environment perception taking advantages of
the agility of the UAVs as well as the powerful computation re-
source aboard UGVs, also allowing assistive local perception with
augmented object information when necessary. The effectiveness of
our system is veriﬁed by both simulations and experiments, which
demonstrate its capability of implementing heterogeneous UAV
and UGV collaborative exploration and structural reconstruction
of the environments through active SLAM, providing optimized
perception for navigation tasks.
Index Terms—Autonomous exploration, active SLAM, view
planning, navigation, heterogeneous vehicular systems, collabora-
tive system.
Manuscript received March 24, 2018; revised October 10, 2018; accepted
December 17, 2018. Date of publication January 1, 2019; date of current version
February 12, 2019. This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants NSFC 61803105 and U1701264. The review
of this paper was coordinated by Dr. A. Chatterjee. (Corresponding author: Wei
Meng.)
H. Qin was with the Temasek Laboratories, National University of Singa-
pore, Singapore 119077. He is now with Roadstar.ai, Shenzhen 518000, China
(e-mail:,qinhailong722@gmail.com).
Z. Meng is with the Future Urban Mobility Group, Singapore-MIT Alliance,
Singapore 11758 (e-mail:,zehui@smart.mit.edu).
W. Meng is with the School of Automation, Guangdong University of Tech-
nology, Guangzhou 510006, China, and also with the Guangdong Province
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Decision and Cooperative Control, Guangzhou
510006, China (e-mail:,meng0025@ntu.edu.sg).
X. Chen was with the Temasek Laboratories, National University of Sin-
gapore, Singapore 119077. He is now with the Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA (e-mail:,xudongc@andrew.cmu.edu).
F. Lin is with the Temasek Laboratories, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 119077 (e-mail:,linfeng@nus.edu.sg).
H. Sun and M. H. Ang are with the Department of Mechanical Engineer-
ing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119077 (e-mail:,a0132560@
u.nus.edu; mpeangh@nus.edu.sg).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TVT.2018.2890416
I. INTRODUCTION
A
UTONOMOUS robots such as unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) and unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs) are be-
coming more and more popular in various ﬁelds of applications.
One of the most demanding capability of the autonomous vehi-
cles is being able to navigate and execute tasks autonomously in
complex environments, especially in GPS-denied environments.
Many of the current vehicle systems are able to perform self
navigation and manipulation in a given environment. As a pre-
requisite, the autonomous vehicles must be provided with a well
constructed environment model. However, some challenging
applications require the vehicles to operate in situations where
no environment model is available beforehand. Such challenges
call for the capabilities of autonomous perception of the environ-
ments to support desired navigation and manipulation tasks. In
this work, we focus on the problem of autonomous exploration
and reconstruction (mapping) for operation in GPS-denied and
fully unknown 3D environments.
In the literature, some of the current systems require partial
environment information to be known a priori, which is utilized
to plan the exploration path [1]–[3]. However, the frameworks
become unfeasible in fully unknown environments. Other works
propose active SLAM strategies requiring no a priori environ-
ment information [4]–[6]. However, the associated applications
are very limited either because their greedy exploration ap-
proaches frequently leads to non-optimal solutions or due to lack
of generalization to complex 3D scenarios. An exploration and
mapping strategy combining the advantages of existing works
is thereby in demand.
Many applications employ multiple vehicles to conduct
cooperative tasks [7]–[10]. The collaboration within multi-agent
systems (MAS), either homogeneous or heterogeneous, can
signiﬁcantly enhance the overall mobility, ﬂexibility and task-
speciﬁc performance as the information is exchanged within
the system to decompose the task with reasonable distribution
of efforts from individual vehicles. Especially, the demand for
heterogeneous vehicles collaboration in a variety of harsh en-
vironments has dramatically increased since last decade [11]–
[14], catching up the growth of homogeneous MAS. To the best
of our knowledge, there is no work has been published on au-
tonomous exploration and mapping using heterogeneous UAVs
and UGVs in GPS-denied cluttered environments, especially for
3D sensing applications.
0018-9545 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
1340
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 68, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019
In this paper, we present an autonomous exploration and map-
ping system using a heterogeneous UAV and UGV team. The
system is built with depth-based SLAM modules, an integra-
tive exploration path planning and navigation framework, and a
collaborative perception scheme, for complex GPS-denied un-
known environment exploration. For the depth-based localiza-
tion and mapping modules, we implement a three-step paradigm
adaptable to most point-cloud compatible sensors, including our
rotating laser-based module which provides a robust localization
and 360-degree full dense maps. The exploration path planning
and navigation framework proposes a two-stage optimized view
planner to generate optimal exploration paths and a volumetric
navigation interface for instantaneous motion planning. Using
the proposed collaborative perception scheme, our suggested
framework demonstrates the capability using the heterogeneous
UAV-UGV system to autonomously explore and reconstruct the
unknown environments without pre-planned trajectories.
The remaining contents of the paper are organized as follows.
Section II gives a brief introduction to related works. Section III
presents the hardware description. In Section IV, the localiza-
tion and mapping strategy proposed in our work is addressed.
Section V elaborates the exploration planning and navigation
approach. Section VI brieﬂy describes the collaborative percep-
tion scheme utilized in the cooperative exploration framework.
Section VII presents the simulation and experiment results.
Section VIII concludes the work.
II. RELATED WORKS
During the past decades, MAS, consisting of heterogeneous
vehicles, has been extensively studied, but few were tested in
realistic environments [7], [8], [13], [15]. As proposed by Paull
et al. [13], an independent agent with ontology in a MAS should
at least inculde perception and planning modules to understand
the surroundings and make decision correspondingly.
A. Perception
In GPS-denied environments, the problem of autonomous
navigation is generally referred as SLAM that helps the vehicle
determine its position and build maps in a priori unknown en-
vironment simultaneously. Based on the perception sensors, the
SLAM can be mainly divided into two major methodologies,
namely vision based SLAM and light detection and ranging
(LIDAR) based SLAM. Recent achievements of the SLAM en-
able vehicles to navigate autonomously in GPS-denied environ-
ments. However, the SLAM still has a lot of unsolved problems
in practical applications. For instance, the computational cost
is quite expensive for vision-based SLAM since a large amount
of information need to be extracted and processed from images
[16], [17]. Recently, Forster et al. [18], [19] proposed a semi-
direct visual odometry (SVO) pipeline which is based on the
existing tracking and mapping multi-threads framework [20]
using a monocular camera. The algorithm ﬂow of the vision-
based SLAM generally includes initialization, feature tracking
and alignment as well as optimization using bundle adjustment
or other optimization methods, e.g., to optimize the nonlinear
error functions in the several variants of SLAM and bundle
adjustment problems, graph-based framework has been widely
utilized [21]. In the initialization phase, corners are detected and
further tracked using optical ﬂow [22] technique. Meanwhile, a
feature based map is built to maintain the estimated scale. In the
alignment phase, coming new observed features are aligned with
previous features using the consistency of photometric. In addi-
tion, keyframes, which have enough aligned features and new
observed features, are continuously inserted into the map for
optimization. Through these delicate processes, the ego-motion
can be estimated and a map can be constructed. Similarly, the
vision-based SLAM using stereo cameras follows the similar
pipeline [23]–[25], except that the initial map is constructed by
left and right images with spatial alignment.
Different from cameras, depth sensors such as LIDAR can
provide non-scale depth information, however, the energy con-
sumption and sensor weight are both high. Therefore, the most
of the existing works use a ﬁxed light-weight 2D LIDAR to ob-
tain a planar motion estimation. Other height estimation sensors
such as barometer [26] are usually fused with the planar mo-
tion estimation module to achieve autonomous navigation for
UAVs. To achieve 6-DOF LIDAR-based pose estimation alone,
it is usually required to use a 3D LIDAR or a rotating 2D LIDAR.
The iterative closest point (ICP) has been extensively studied
for autonomous vehicles related localization and mapping issues
[27]. One of the well-known issues of the depth-based SLAM is
the data distortion which is caused by unknown ego-motion of
vehicles. This phenomenon widely exists in both the 2D and the
3D LIDAR cases [28]. Few works have succeed in solving the
data distortion using the LIDAR sensor alone, while additional
sensors, e.g. cameras [29], are used to compensate the unknown
ego-motion between the successive laser measurements. In this
work, we will try to tackle a similar issue on point-cloud based
modules with associated feature based motion estimation.
B. Planning
The UAV-UGV cooperative framework proposed in this work
is essentially an exploratory MAS with two main categories of
issues to be solved:
1) View Planning: Recently, the automatic exploration task
based on optimized view planning becomes a key issue for ve-
hicles in large-scale GPS-denied environments. Different from
traditional waypoints based navigation, vehicles need to deter-
mine the path according to the information from each view and
to optimize the overall paths. Due to the limited sensing range
of onboard sensors, the optimized view sequence is also subject
to the accuracy of localization and the quality of reconstruc-
tion. Blaer and Allen [30] proposed a two distinct stage data
acquisition approach. At ﬁrst, a 2D map is given to obtain an
optimized path in terms of view coverage. After that, a 3D laser
is utilized to construct a voxel-based occupancy map and com-
pute the next view incrementally. To deal with the increasing
localization errors, Vasquez-Gomez et al. [31] proposed a vol-
umetric next-best-view planning algorithm for the purpose of
object reconstruction. The view sequence is determined from
a set of view candidates to maximize the potential informa-
tion and minimize the localization uncertainty. More recently, a
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
QIN et al.: AUTONOMOUS EXPLORATION AND MAPPING SYSTEM USING HETEROGENEOUS UAVs AND UGVs
1341
genetic algorithm based optimized view planning was proposed
by Martin et al. [32]. The time-consuming space exploration to
guarantee the view coverage becomes more effective because
of the optimization process using the genetic algorithms. The
effectiveness and accuracy were well demonstrated in the sim-
ulated environments. Similarly, the active SLAM in [4] also
provided dynamic view planning to improve the quality of re-
construction. However, the most of the existing view planning
methods only work to perform a 2D perception and localization
which can be of a great disadvantage for the acquisition of view
information. View planning combined with a 3D perception in
large and complex environments has not yet to be demonstrated.
2) Cooperative Exploration: Every vehicle in the heteroge-
neous team should have certain capability of achieving state
estimation, planning and decision making. Especially in the
scenario such as exploring an unknown environment, the self-
exploration capability of each vehicle is critical to the whole
mission. In [33], a cooperative routing for UAVs and UGVs
was proposed. The proposed exploration policy travels between
predeﬁned targets to optimize the Euclidean traveling distance.
However, a prior knowledge of the environment is mandatory
to this framework which usually does not exist in practice. More
recently, Li et al. [34] deployed multiple UAVs to build map and
identify obstacles using vision sensors. The identiﬁed map was
further utilized for UGV’s path planning. However, the proposed
hybrid path planning only provided a limited 2D planar trajec-
tory which does not fully exploit the potentialities of the UAVs.
Sometimes UAVs and UGVs teams are preferred to reach for
targets in different scenarios. For instance, in [35], a switched
control architecture between UAVs and UGVs was proposed to
track a moving target. In this work, the UAVs and the UGVs
were deployed in groups to efﬁciently detect and track mov-
ing targets in certain regions. The vehicles in the framework
were modeled as point masses without differentiating their re-
spective motion constraints and also localization approach was
not provided. Similarly, in [36] and [37], probabilistic-based
path planning algorithms were proposed for UAVs and UGVs
to cooperatively track moving targets. These works well utilize
a hierarchical hybrid system to coordinate individual vehicles
in searching task, but unfortunately the navigation was either
limited in 2D space or did not generalize well among the het-
erogeneous vehicles.
The aim of our work is to promote the research on 3D explo-
ration in GPS-denied environments using heterogeneous vehi-
cle teams. In this paper, an integrative exploration path planning
and navigation framework with optimized perception schemes
is proposed for UAV-UGV cooperative exploration to promote
the coverage and efﬁciency of the exploration and mapping for
3D unknown environments.
III. HARDWARE DESCRIPTION
Our proposed MAS consists of a ﬂexible micro UAV and a
high-payload autonomous UGV. The platforms are customized
to be holonomic w.r.t 3D and planar workspaces (omnidirec-
tioanl motion with regard to their respective SE3 and SE2 con-
ﬁguration spaces). The UAV is a quadrotor platform which is
Fig. 1.
UAV and UGV platforms with onboard sensors.
made of carbon ﬁber. The onboard sensors, including inertial
measurement unit and magnetic compass, are used to provide
basic maneuverability for safe pilot. A high level processor us-
ing Intel-NUC is installed for onboard algorithm processing.
The UGV is made of Mecanum wheels while driven by 4 in-
dependent servo motors. The micro controllers communicate
directly with the onboard processor through Ethernet connec-
tion. The communication between UAV and UGV is based on a
wireless network connection through Secure Shell (SSH) [38].
The customized rotary LIDAR device is rigidly mounted on top
of the UAV platform and a stereo camera (ZED) is mounted
below the LIDAR to provide ﬁne point cloud. A 3D LIDAR
is installed on top of the UGV frame with an RGB-D sensor
(KINECT) mounted below. The conﬁguration of our system is
shown in Fig. 1.
IV. FEATURE BASED LOCALIZATION AND MAPPING
In this section, we present the depth based SLAM mod-
ule employed in this work. Basically, we utilize point-cloud
based localization and mapping pipelines so as to improve
the robustness of our system across textured and non-textured
environments.
For all point-cloud compatible sensors, including our rotat-
ing LIDAR module, we implement a dedicated feature-based
localization and mapping paradigm which follows three steps:
1) feature extraction 2) feature association 3) motion estimation
and mapping. The three steps can be customized towards con-
secutive frames with respect to sensor models. The details are
as follows.
A. Feature Extraction
As Abdul mentioned in [39], point cloud feature extraction
in real-world environments is practically difﬁcult because the
environments contain large amounts of data, noise and outliers.
In order to extract reliable features, outlier rejection and ro-
bust ﬁtting generally are required. In a 2D laser scanning, the
corresponding feature points are usually chosen according to
the change of the scanning points in the local neighborhood.
In our work, we propose to apply a Euclidean distance clus-
tering step, followed by feature points selection to represent
adjacent attributes, edges and ﬂat points. Moreover, instead of
focusing on traditional speciﬁc forms of the feature points, we
insist on employing a general point-based mapping to compen-
sate for motion estimation errors, for which we hereby adopt a
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
1342
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 68, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019
Fig. 2.
Front view of feature points (in red) in one rotation.
high-standard feature points selection process with novel cus-
tomization in our applications.
In our work, for a feature point p in a single scan l of the k-th
rotation, a relative variation ratio Rk,l,p is deﬁned to distinguish
an edge point ek,l,i (larger than a certain variation ratio) from
a ﬂat point fk,l,i (smaller than a certain variation ratio). Fig. 2
shows extracted feature after one rotation in a typical corridor
area.
Rk,l,p =
lavg,p
|| XL
k,l,p ||,
(1)
where XL
k,l,p denotes the coordinates of the feature point p,
lavg,p is the average length of the edges incident to a point p in
a single scan l of the k-th rotation within a local neighborhood,
i.e.,
lavg,p = 1
N

qϵN (i)
|| XL
k,l,p −XL
k,l,q || ,
(2)
where N stands for total number of points adjacent to p, and q
stands for a neighboring point of p.
B. Feature Association
Our proposed feature association procedure follows the simi-
lar concept of vision-based SLAM which performs to minimize
the feature projection errors. However, there is no explicit geo-
metric relationship among laser points. To tackle this issue, in
our work, the geometric relationships corresponding to both the
point-to-line and the point-to-plane strategies are constructed
respectively to associate points in different rotations.
r The point-to-line correspondence is formed by using an
edge point p in the k-th rotation and its nearest neighbor
point m in the (k + 1)-th rotation. In addition, a neighbor-
ing point of m in consecutive scan is searched and denoted
as n. The point-to-line distance can be obtained using fol-
lowing equation:
de = |vl × ve|
|vl|
,
(3)
where vl stands for (XL
k+1,l,m −XL
k+1,l,n) and ve stands
for (XL
k,l,p −XL
k+1,l,m) as shown in Fig. 2(a).
r The point-to-plane correspondence is formed by a a ﬂat
point q in the k-th rotation to its neighboring point r in the
(k + 1)-th rotation along the normal direction. Therefore,
Fig. 3.
Edge/ﬂat point to line illustration.
the point-to-plane distance can be calculated as
dp = n · vp,
(4)
where vp stands for (XL
k,l,q −XL
k,l,r) as shown in Fig. 2(b)
and n is the unit normal direction determined by non-
collinear neighbouring points of r, s and t:
n = vp1 × vp2
|vp1 × vp2|,
(5)
where vp1 is (XL
k+1,l,s −XL
k+1,l,r) and vp2 is (XL
k+1,l,t −
XL
k+1,l,r).
C. Motion Estimation and Mapping
Translation and rotation of a 3D point p in (k + 1)th rotation
XL
k+1,l,p with respect to the last laser frame k is expressed by
XL
k,l,p = 
XL
k+1,l,p = Rk
k+1XL
k+1,l,p + P k
k+1,
(6)
where
Rk
k+1 =
⎡
⎢⎣
1
0
0
0
cα
−sα
0
sα
cα
⎤
⎥⎦
⎡
⎢⎣
cβ
0
sβ
0
1
0
−sβ
0
cβ
⎤
⎥⎦
⎡
⎢⎣
cγ
−sγ
0
sγ
cγ
0
0
0
1
⎤
⎥⎦,
P k
k+1 =
⎡
⎣
px
py
pz
⎤
⎦,
α, β and γ represent the UAV body Euler angles corre-
spondingly. Based on the transformation relationship T k
k+1 =
(Rk
k+1, P k
k+1) stated above, combining the feature point corre-
spondence, a nonlinear function w(T k
k+1) = d can be formed
to express (3) and (4). The square error function can be
established as
S = (w(T k
k+1))2
(7)
To minimize the objective function, i.e., S = 0, Trust-Region-
Reﬂective method (TRR) [40] is adopted. The correspond-
ing update step σi = (T k
k+1)i+1 −(T k
k+1)i can be obtained by
solving
min
σ∈N ψi(σi),
(8)
where ψi(σ) = gT σ + 1
2σT Hσ and g and H are the gradient
and Hessian, respectively of w evaluated at (T k+1
k
)i. Δk > 0 is
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
QIN et al.: AUTONOMOUS EXPLORATION AND MAPPING SYSTEM USING HETEROGENEOUS UAVs AND UGVs
1343
Fig. 4.
The overall system architecture of the proposed framework.
the trust region radius. The acceptable ratio is determined by
rk =
(ψ(0) −ψi(σi))
(w(T k
k+1) −w(T k
k+1 + σi)),
(9)
which is used to decide the iteration of trial step σi.
V. EXPLORATION PATH PLANNING AND NAVIGATION
In this section, we present a novel framework which contains
a view planning algorithm as well as a volumetric map based
motion planning interface, for generating the corresponding ex-
ploration paths.
The proposed two-stage optimized next-view planning mod-
ule is a customization from our recent work [41]. In this work, we
further explore the SLAM results and extend the active mapping
function. In addition, online view planning and motion planning
are performed to further explore the unknown environments, by
considering the sensor constraints. The overview of the system
architecture is shown in Fig. 4. The proposed optimized next
view planning algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.
An initial scan is performed when the system is instantiated in
an unknown environment while the map is updated accordingly.
Each occupancy grid would be registered as free, occupied or
unknown, based on the information acquired. Based on the in-
stantaneous map, a set of viewpoints would be generated by the
planner using our proposed frontier-based coverage sampler.
The objective of this proposed sampler is to have a compre-
hensive coverage of the boundary of the explored and unknown
area. In the meanwhile, visualized area of the samples is marked
so that there is no extensive overlay among the existing view-
points and predicted observation of succeeding samples. With
the aid of dynamically updated environmental model, in every it-
eration, viewpoint candidates are trimmed. To achieve globally
optimized path to navigate all the viewpoints with the short-
est distance and minimum back-and-forth motion, a ﬁxed-start
open travelling salesman problem (FSOTSP) solver is employed
which heuristically calculates an optimal open sequence of the
exploration path. The ﬁrst edge of the sequence of exploration
is extracted and sent for path planning through volumetric nav-
igation interface. Collision checking is then conducted using
ray-casting with a speciﬁed bounding box, regarding the 3D
map built from the SLAM. External sampling based motion
planning library in conjunction with local trajectory optimiza-
tion is utilized to authenticate valid local motion plans. To gather
new information and update the environment model, such steps
are iteratively executed.
The following subsections explicitly illustrate the details of
our optimized next view planning scheme.
A. Heuristic Volumetric Information Gain Model
The proposed next view planning algorithm is based on a
volumetric information gain model, which is closely related to
the concepts of entropy [5]. In this work, we simplify the imple-
mentation with a measure to reﬂect the possible augmentations
of knowledge. Based on sensor characteristics, the information
gain is estimated from a visibility propagation with ray-casting.
A simpliﬁed indirect indicator of the information gain is pro-
posed to avoid computing practically intractable closed-form
solutions. A heuristic augmentation of knowledge, i.e., g based
on the occupancy probability as well as visibility-based prop-
agation model is built to reﬂect deviation of uncertainty of the
occupancy probability through traveling indeterminate areas.
g(p(oi|xxiew, z)) = p(oi|xview, z)p(vi|o0:i−1, xview, z),
(10)
where p(oi|xview, z) and p(vi|o0:i−1, xview, z) are the current
occupancy probabilities as registered in the instantaneous map
and the visibility probability of oi measured from the viewpoint
xview, respectively.
The visibility transition could be propagated as a function of
the complement of occupancy probability distribution, i.e.,
p(vi|o0:i−1, xview) =
i−1

j=0
(1 −p(oj|xview)),
(11)
which is in line with the fact that the lower occupancy probability
indicates the smaller chances of occlusion and also the higher
visibility. In this case, the free and occupied cells have small
values while the unknown cells have greater ones, which is in a
parabolic shape between [0, 1].
The total information gain at xview is then calculated by
E[ Gxv i e w ] =

z
p(z|xview)

oi ∈C (z)
g(p(oi|xview))dz,
(12)
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
1344
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 68, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019
Fig. 5.
Frontier-based coverage planning instances. Viewpoints highlighted
as yellow arrow markers. OctoMap colors correspond to height variation.
where z represents the measurements in the volumetric map and
C(z) is a set of cells covered by the sensor.
B. Frontier-Based Coverage Planning
For the purpose of a complete exploration, we propose a
frontier-based coverage planner for a minimum set of viewpoints
planning as described in Algorithm 2, which is necessary for
exploring the boundaries of explored and unexplored 3D spaces.
Two planning instances of 2.5D and 3D scenarios are shown in
Fig. 5.
Since our system contains a UAV and a UGV which are with
different kinematic constraints, slight customization has been
applied to adapt the planner to the different exploration and
mapping layers accordingly. For instance, the viewpoints sam-
pling is converted from 3D (SE3) space to 2D (SE2) space to
allow instant navigation of the UGV. However, the information
gain model is kept in 3D throughout. Here we brieﬂy describe
the underlying core algorithm and explain its customized im-
plementation in this work. Firstly, the viewpoints are randomly
sampled from the frontier boundary regions using uniform
sampling and neighbourhood sampling, i.e., UniformSample
(which randomly draws a uniform sample x1 from the space X)
and NeighbourSample (which samples a random sample x2 in
the neighbourhood of x1 with a radius r) in the Algorithm 2,
followed by frontier check and visibility check. The func-
tion IsFrontier returns true if the pair of input samples has
one being free and the other being unknown. The function
IsVisible conducts ray-shooting to check if the two samples
are visible to each other. A sample is selected as an admissible
frontier viewpoint only if it is in a free space and visible to
an unknown space sample in its neighbourhood, i.e., the valid
sample is returned by the function (TheValidOf).
To ensure efﬁcient sampling and a reasonable set of view-
points, we employ a neighbourhood checking step to avoid
severe overlap of viewpoints coverage. For the coarse explo-
ration layer, this is achieved by a k-d trees-based nearest neigh-
bour check with a speciﬁed range [42] (see lines 6-9 in the
Algorithm 2). The function NearestNeighbour checks if the
viewpoint is in the neighbourhood of its nearest neighbour of
the existing viewpoints such that all viewpoints “repel” each
other by a range R. For the ﬁne mapping layer, we use ray-
casting to mark individual viewpoint coverage in the registered
OctoMap (see lines 11-14 in the Algorithm 2). The function
IsCovered serves to avoid viewpoints falling in the regions
covered by any existing viewpoints (registered by function
RegisterCoverage) regarding the sensor model. Doing so al-
lows a relatively “rougher” sample ﬁltering policy for the coarse
exploration phase to achieve faster coverage of the environment
contour while keeping relatively “ﬁner” for the ﬁne mapping
phase to pick up details with smoother movements.
C. Viewpoints Pruning
As the exploration goes on, more viewpoints from the newly
explored space may be added. Due to the updating map, nec-
essary re-evaluation and ﬁltering of the information gains are
performed to prune the set of viewpoints such that a reasonable
scanning coverage is maintained for efﬁcient exploration. The
information gains of the remaining viewpoints should be con-
tinuously evaluated as they may be affected by the recent scans.
The remaining scans and newly inserted samples form a new
series of viewpoints candidate. Any viewpoints whose informa-
tion gain below certain threshold would be dropped from the set
to maintain a reasonable size, as shown in Algorithm 3.
D. FSOTSP Solver
After the coverage planning stage, numerous viewpoints are
available for scanning. The viewing sequence and the associated
paths will affect the exploration and mapping efﬁciency. The
straightforward methods are greedy schemes but are subject
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.7]
QIN et al.: AUTONOMOUS EXPLORATION AND MAPPING SYSTEM USING HETEROGENEOUS UAVs AND UGVs
1345
to local minima problem. The sense of global optimality is
therefore important to keep the overall exploration efﬁciency.
In this work, we consider a variant of the traveling salesman
problem (TSP) which connects the viewpoints in an open-loop
optimal sequence. The ﬁxed start open traveling salesman prob-
lem (FSOTSP) takes the current position of the vehicle as a
starting point and tries to visit each of the viewpoints once and
ends at one of them with a minimal cost.
To achieve the global optimality, we formulate the cost in
FSOTSP as a function of the information gain and traveling
distance. The utility of the edge connecting two viewpoints is
supposed to be information gain driven and penalized on the
traveling distance. Therefore, the cost matrix of the viewpoints
set Xviewpoints should be the reverse of the utility as described
in Algorithm 4, where xi, xj represents the Euclidean norm
of the viewpoints xi and xj. The parameter η is tunable for
emphasizing the depreciation of the utility along the direction
of travelling, which makes a trade-off between the information
gain and the travelling distance.
To solve the FSOTSP, we propose and implement an efﬁ-
cient genetic algorithm as presented in Algorithm 5 to obtain an
optimal viewing sequence iteratively. The algorithm employs a
simpliﬁed breeding mechanism in which the population is ran-
domly partitioned into subgroups to undergo local selection and
mutation without crossover operation (see lines 4-10 in Algo-
rithm 5). In such a way, the evolution process iteratively updates
the global optimal sequence, providing a reasonable speed with-
out sacriﬁcing the quality of the solution. The objective function
is the total cost of a route, which is to be optimized in the al-
gorithm. The best route is sought for every population. Then,
the population is divided into sub-groups. In each sub-group,
Fig. 6.
FSOTSP solution instances for 50 random viewpoints in 2D and 3D
spaces (assuming all viewpoints have the same information gain).
the best route is chosen to generate offspring within the group.
Portions of the best picked routes are mutate by the breeding
process through sliding and swapping position to generate new
routes. Such steps are repeated until each sub-group is ﬁlled by
new routes. In the end, the best routes in the old and new pop-
ulation are compared to ensure the population is updated using
reduced best-cost-sofar. The whole process is repeated until a
desired goal is achieved. The optimality is evaluated under the
condition of the instantaneous knowledge of the environment
model which is unknown a priori.
Two exemplary optimized solutions of 2D and 3D cases with
50 random viewpoints using our FSOTSP solver are shown in
Fig. 6.
E. Volumetric Motion Planning Interface
The navigation of the UAV and the UGV is supported by a
volumetric motion planning interface which integrates the in-
stantaneous environment map with an external motion planning
library.
In this work, we employ an improved version of our recently
developed sampling-based path planning library, i.e., BIT*-H
[43] for navigation in cluttered environments. BIT*-H is spe-
cially customized for fast and optimal planning, independent
of the collision checking schemes. The algorithm builds on
the Batch Informed Trees (BIT*) [44] which employs ordered
search and informed sampling of a heuristic (hyper) ellipsoidal
subspace limiting the planning space to accelerate the con-
vergence to optimal solutions. We extend the original algo-
rithm with obstacle-guided sampling and biasing strategy to
adapt the advantage of the BIT* to cluttered environments. The
obstacle-guided sampling strategy embeds additional obstacle-
based Gaussian sampling processes in the underlying uniform
sampling. Such hybrid sampling strategy leads to a rise in den-
sity of the samples near the obstacles, enhancing the probability
of sampling difﬁcult-to-ﬁnd regions like narrow passages. In
addition, the embedded Gaussian sampling process use a sim-
ple heuristic to “spot navigators” which are of crucial geometric
positions linking to the difﬁcult-to-ﬁnd regions. This is used
to bias the samples near those regions and thus speed up the
convergence to globally optimal solutions.
The motion planning interface is facilitated with ray-shooting
based collision checker, which is in principle the same as the ray-
casting approach engaged for the information gain calculation
at the view planning stage, except that the checking range is now
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.8]
1346
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 68, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019
subject to the bounding boxes of the vehicle model. The collision
check is performed using the instantaneous OctoMap at the time
the planner is engaged. The planner samples the continuous
space and traces back the Octree to check the corresponding
volumetric cell occupancy.
The preliminary global path plan provides discrete explo-
ration way-points with plain connecting edges which are ready
for execution. The waypoints contains both position and ori-
entation conﬁgurations, which makes up primary edges for the
vehicle to set its poses along the way and conduct continuous
mapping while in motion. We further optimize the edges us-
ing local trajectory planners such as CHOMP solver [45] for the
UAV and the DWA planner [46] for the UGV (with standard cost
metrics as per planner). In such a way we combine the global
and local optimal planning strategies in a uniﬁed infrastructure
to serve the navigation.
Some discussion on the computational complexity of Algo-
rithms 1–5 can be found in the full-length version of this paper in
https://drive.google.com/ﬁle/d/1XcHwOUt_StcVA3mWRCNo
Xtsha6s-eBVN/view?usp=drivesdk.
VI. COLLABORATIVE PERCEPTION SCHEME
Firstly, we would like to mention both the UAV and the UGV
are capable of independent autonomous exploration and recon-
struction work in unknown environments using our optimized
view planning paradigm. Practically, the performance of such
independent exploration and reconstruction is subject to phys-
ical constraints of the platforms. For instance, UAVs usually
possess higher mobility and agility but are weak in payload
and ﬂight endurance. They are suitable for complex structures
instead of large-scale environments. In contrast, UGVs usually
have better endurance and greater on-board resources, including
a variety of sensors and data processing units, but suffer from
constrained planar motions. Usually, the scale and complexity
of the environments are unknown a priori. Instead of relying on
single type of vehicle alone, we propose a collaborative scheme
using heterogeneous UAVs and UGVs team to conduct comple-
mentary perception tasks in unknown environments.
1) Two-Layered Exploration and Mapping: To wisely ex-
ploit the advantages of heterogeneous vehicles while consider-
ing their respective limitations, we decompose the exploration
and mapping tasks into two layers. The ﬁrst layer is designed to
be a coarse mapping process, in which the UGV mounted with
a 3D LIDAR is deployed to perform a preliminary exploration
and produce a coarse mapping. Upon completion, a primary map
built in the ﬁrst layer is retrieved by the UAV as a fundamental
environment model and a navigational reference. In the second
layer, the UAV exploits its advantage in mobility to perform a
complementary ﬁne mapping using a tilting 2D laser module
and vision sensors, ﬁlling up the cavities left over in the ﬁrst
layer.
2) Assistive Perception for Local Scene: Once the overall
environment model construction is ﬁnished, the UGV can be
engaged for navigation tasks. However, the previously built vol-
umetric environment model may not be detailed enough to carry
out complex tasks like contacting and grasping (e.g., subject to
occlusions and missing information) since the perception unit
on the UGV is often subjected to blind zones due to its restricted
motions. In this case, an augmented perception with ﬁner res-
olution would be required frequently. The UAV is therefore a
better choice to provide assistive perception due to its higher
mobility. Speciﬁcally, targeting certain regions whose scene in-
formation is insufﬁcient, the UAV can be deployed to perform
augmented perception using the same optimized view planning
framework. The reconstruction contribution from the UAV is
again integrated with the existing map using the SLAM strategy
as explained in Section IV.
3) Map Transfer: Our UAV-UGV cooperation strategy is es-
sentially in a decentralized manner: the UAV and the UGV
update their navigation strategy and map on their own to ex-
plore the environments extensively. Comparing with the exist-
ing approaches, we highly utilize the vehicle-speciﬁc mobility
of heterogeneous system to construct and explore the unknown
environments in different detailed levels. Here we emphasize
the importance of map sharing issue for maximizing the perfor-
mance of the UAV and the UGV. The basic target is towards a
global coherent exploration result with different level of aware-
ness of the environments. During the map transferring, we ﬁrst
treat the map from the UGV as point-cloud based format. Then,
we down-sample the point-cloud size to reduce the size of the
map into a delicate level, after which the map is further con-
verted to a volumetric map. The UAV takes the volumetric map
upon instantiation and updates the occupancy information of
previous uncovered regions during the exploration.
By combing the efforts of the UAV and the UGV, we can
realize an autonomous 3D ﬁne mapping which is usually a
challenging task.
VII. SIMULATION AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section presents the simulation and experimental results
of effective perception for autonomous exploration, mapping
and manipulation in unknown environments using our proposed
heterogeneous UAV and UGV system.
A. Simulation Results
1) Independent Exploration and Mapping: The simulation
is conducted using Gazebo simulator RotorS [47]. We employ
a LIDAR model with 16 channels and range up to 30 m for
the UGV 2.5D mapping and a stereo-vision sensor model with
100◦(H) × 60◦(V) FoV and range up to 10 m for the UAV 3D
mapping.
Firstly, we demonstrate the ability of independent exploration
and mapping on both the UAV and the UGV using our optimized
view planning framework and the volumetric motion planning
interface. Simulated worlds such as an ofﬁce corridor and a
footbridge are created for the UAV and the UGV respectively.
As shown in Fig. 7, both vehicles are able to generate reasonable
exploration routes and conduct complete overall mapping of the
environment contours from scratch, which are sufﬁcient for their
respective navigation. Due to the vehicle and sensor constraints,
the 2.5D mapping by the UGV is sparser and misses out certain
details at corners, as expected.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.9]
QIN et al.: AUTONOMOUS EXPLORATION AND MAPPING SYSTEM USING HETEROGENEOUS UAVs AND UGVs
1347
Fig. 7.
Illustration of independent exploration and mapping using UGV and
UAV alone. Exploration path highlighted with colored line segments. OctoMap
colors correspond to height variation.
Fig. 8.
Mapping results for a simulated chamber and a tabletop environment
using our approach and a 2.5D frontier based approach. The exploration paths
are highlighted in red. The colors of OctoMap correspond to height variation.
In order to evaluate the efﬁciency of our proposed view plan-
ning framework, we compare our approach with a 2.5D frontier
based scheme, where the exploration and mapping is conducted
according to 2D environment information acquired, and one of
the state-of-the-art NBV planner, the Receding Horizon NBV
planner [6]. The 2.5D frontier based planner greedily plans for
the exploration sequence of 3-DOF (x, y, yaw) frontier-based
viewpoints sampled over the 2D environment map, while a 3D
map is built using sensor scanning during the exploration, thus
referred as 2.5D. The qualitative comparison results are shown
in Fig. 8. From the ﬁgure we can see that both approaches are
able to map a complete contour of the planar space. However,
the 2.5D frontier based scheme apparently misses out some 3D
features which are spotted in our approach. This elaborates the
advantage of utilizing 3D information gain in our work, regard-
less of the vehicle conﬁguration.
Fig. 9.
Exploration results for simulated bridge using a stereo vision sensor.
Exploration paths highlighted in 3D green line segments.
Fig. 10.
Exploration results for simulated footbridge using a stereo vision
sensor. Exploration paths highlighted in 3D green line segments.
Fig. 11.
Statistics of 10 successful runs for the four simulated environments
using our approach and the receding horizon (RH) planner.
Repeated trials of 3D mapping using UAVs are also conducted
to qualitatively compare our approach with the frontier based
scheme. Moreover, our approaches are implemented in four dif-
ferent environments. The test results in footbridge and bridge
environments are shown in Figs. 9 and 10, respectively. The sta-
tistical comparison results of for the four different environments
are shown in Fig. 11. As the statistics reveal, our planner gener-
ally returns smoother and shorter exploration paths (and time)
while the Receding Horizon (RH) planner tends to give more
complex and longer paths, which becomes more and more ap-
parent as the complexity and scale of the environment increase.
In addition, the performances also reﬂect that our approach is
less sensitive to environment size from the perspective of tuning
parameters, as the RH planner require more frequent adjust-
ment of the exploration tree parameters in order to adapt to new
scenarios.
2) Collaborative Exploration and Mapping: Extensive sim-
ulations have been conducted to evaluate our proposed UAV-
UGV collaborative exploration and mapping scheme. In Fig. 12,
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.10]
1348
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 68, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019
Fig. 12.
Collaborative exploration and mapping for a simulated cluttered
chamber. Exploration path highlighted with colored line segments. OctoMap
colors correspond to height variation.
Fig. 13.
Collaborative exploration and mapping for a simulated large-scale
warehouse.
a simulated chamber with cluttered obstacles and barriers is ex-
plored by the UAV, which provides a coarse 2.5D volumetric
model of the chamber (2D cost map+3D OctoMap). The 2D
map is projected from the 3D map for UGV navigation purpose
only. Starting from the coarse model, the UAV with a stereo
vision sensor continues to perform the ﬁne mapping and returns
a complete 3D map of the chamber, covering up the uncollected
information of regions not reached by the UGV. Similarly, the
test results of a large-scale warehouse are presented in Fig. 13.
The coarse mapping by UGV is able to provide a basic con-
tour of the environment with a few steps of auto-exploration.
However, the details of interior layout is missing due to the con-
strained motion of the UGV. As expected, the UAV successfully
ﬁlls up the cavities with necessary geometric structures.
Quantitative evaluation is also performed to compare the col-
laborative exploration with independent exploration in terms of
total exploration time. The simulated warehouse environment
is chosen as the benchmark scenario since it is of large-scale
and contains various complex structures. As we observe that the
Fig. 14.
Comparison of independent exploration using UAV and collaborative
exploration in 10 successful runs for the simulated warehouse.
independent 2.5D mapping by the UGV is only able to cover up
to approximately 60% of the speciﬁed bounding box of the 3D
exploration space, we employ the UAV for independent explo-
ration scheme, and record the exploration time at several check
points-completion (reconstruction) of 70%, 80%, and 90% of
the speciﬁed exploration space, respectively, to investigate the
effectiveness of the proposed collaborative evaluation scheme.
The statistics of 10 trials of the independent exploration and the
collaborative exploration is shown in Fig. 14. The results demon-
strate that the collaborative scheme is more advantageous in this
large-scale environment in terms of total exploration time, which
credits to the 2.5D coarse mapping saving majority of the view
planning and motion planning efforts with reduced planning
space (SE2 space compared to SE3 space). We also note that
the increments in exploration time between the check points are
less in the collaborative scheme than the independent scheme.
This is probably because the coarse mapping layer provides
global environment information to the ﬁne mapping layer to be
used as the navigation reference, such that the original global
optimization problem is roughly solved and decomposed to lo-
cal sub-optimization operations which take less exploration and
mapping effort.
3) Assistive Scene Augmentation: A table-top scene as
shown in Fig. 15 is simulated to illustrate the assistive aug-
mentation using the UAV. In the setup, the UGV carrying the
manipulator scans the scene with a RGB-D sensor and con-
structs the corresponding volumetric model. The UGV is able
to offer an almost full view of the table with omnidirectional
planar motion but fails to provide complete reconstruction of the
objects on the top as well as lose some details underneath, as
shown in Fig. 15(b)–(c), due to limited sensor view. Fig. 15(d)
present the results of the augmented table-top scene by the
UAV. Such augmentation enriches the local object information
in details which could potentially be helpful for manipulation
applications requiring pushing or grasping tasks, etc. To clarify,
the manipulation tasks considered in this work are not regarding
visual/semantic based manipulation capabilities, but making use
of off-the-shelf manipulation packages such as MoveIt [48] and
LineMOD [49] which can already be integrated to our frame-
work, to perform position-based manipulation with geometric
point cloud information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.11]
QIN et al.: AUTONOMOUS EXPLORATION AND MAPPING SYSTEM USING HETEROGENEOUS UAVs AND UGVs
1349
Fig. 15.
UAV scene augmentation for a simulated table top scenario. Explo-
ration path highlighted with colored line segments. OctoMap colors correspond
to height variation.
Fig. 16.
Real ﬂight test environments.
Fig. 17.
Collaborative exploration and mapping for the test arena. Exploration
path highlighted with colored line segments. OctoMap colors correspond to
height variation.
B. Experiment Results
Real ﬂight tests have also been conducted to verify the fea-
sibility of our system in real-world applications. A test arena
with cluttered pillars and a laboratory area as shown in Fig. 16
are involved for the two-layered collaborative exploration and
mapping tests and the scene augmentation tests, respectively.
The mapping results of the test arena are shown in Fig. 17. The
coarse map is constructed using the UGV with a 3D LIDAR,
producing a sparse 3D map and incomplete information of the
obstacles. The UAV continues the mapping with a tilting 2D
laser module and manages to build a denser map with ﬁner local
information, making up the missing parts on the ground, walls,
and the pillars. In Fig. 18, the local reconstruction of a table
Fig. 18.
3D laboratory scene reconstructed.
area in a laboratory using a UGV (with a RGB-D sensor) and
a UAV (with a vision sensor), is presented. The UGV performs
local scans near the table area and reconstructs the scene. Due to
the large footprint of the UGV limiting the scanning positions,
loss of information is present as shown in Fig. 18(a) (the cavi-
ties). The UAV with a vision sensor continues the reconstruction
with a focused augmentation around the middle table. Although
slight distortion due to the localization errors is present, the
missing table-top and obstacle information is compensated as
shown in Fig. 18(b).
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a collaborative vehicular system
using heterogeneous UAV and UGV agents with optimized
perception scheme for autonomous exploration, mapping, nav-
igation and manipulation tasks in GPS-denied 3D unknown
environments. The system implements an optimized perception
scheme to decompose the task as a coarse exploration layer and
a ﬁne mapping layer using our optimized next view planning
framework. The overall system provides an efﬁcient pipeline for
fast environment perception. We have evaluated our proposed
framework with simulation and experimental tests, which well
demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed
framework in terms of travelling distance and map quality. The
system is proven capable of implementing heterogeneous col-
laborative exploration and active SLAM, providing optimized
perception for navigation and potential manipulation tasks.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Okada and J. Miura, “Exploration and observation planning for 3D
indoor mapping,” in Proc. IEEE/SICE Int. Symp. Syst. Integration, 2015,
pp. 599–604.
[2] A. Bircher et al., “Structural inspection path planning via iterative view-
point resampling with application to aerial robotics,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Automat., 2015, pp. 6423–6430.
[3] C. Luo, S. McClean, G. Parr, L. Teacy, and R. D. Nardi, “UAV position
estimation and collision avoidance using the extended Kalman ﬁlter,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 2749–2762, Jul. 2013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.12]
1350
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 68, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2019
[4] K. Lenac et al., “Fast active SLAM for accurate and complete cover-
age mapping of unknown environments,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Intell.
Autonomous Systems, Padova, Italy, 2014, pp. 415–428.
[5] C. Potthast and G. Sukhatme, “A probabilistic framework for next best
view estimation in a cluttered environment,” J. Vis. Commun. Image Rep-
resentation, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 148–164, 2014.
[6] A. Bircher, M. Kamel, K. Alexis, H. Oleynikova, and R. Siegwart, “Re-
ceding horizon next-best-view planner for 3D exploration,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., 2016, pp. 1462–1468.
[7] H. M. Huang, K. Pavek, B. Novak, J. Albus, and E. Messin, “A framework
for autonomy levels for unmanned systems (ALFUS),” in Proc. AUVSI’s
Unmanned Syst. North Amer., 2005, pp. 849–863.
[8] B. Grocholsky, J. Keller, V. Kumar, and G. Pappas, “Cooperative air and
ground surveillance,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Mag., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 16–
25, Sep. 2006.
[9] W. Meng, Z. He, R. Su, P. Yadav, R. Teo, and L. Xie, “Decentralized
multi-UAV ﬂight autonomy for moving convoys search and track,” IEEE
Trans. Control Syst. Technol, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1480–1487, Jul. 2017.
[10] Y. Hu and W. Meng, “ROSUnitySim: Development and experimentation
of a real-time simulator for multi-unmanned aerial vehicle local planning,”
Simulation, vol. 92, no. 10, pp. 931–944, 2016.
[11] A. Brand˜ao, M. Sarcinelli-Filho, and R. Carelli, “Leader-following control
of a UAV-UGV formation,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Adv. Robot., 2013,
pp. 1–6.
[12] M. Kamel, K. Ghamry, and Y. Zhang, “Fault tolerant cooperative control of
multiple UAVs-UGVs under actuator faults,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Unmanned
Aircraft Syst., 2015, pp. 644–649.
[13] L. Paull et al., “Towards an ontology for autonomous robots,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2012, pp. 1359–1364.
[14] K. Guo, Z. Qiu, W. Meng, L. Xie, and R. Teo, “Ultra-wideband based
cooperative relative localization algorithm and experiments for multiple
unmanned aerial vehicles in GPS denied environments,” Int. J. Micro Air
Veh., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 169–186, 2017.
[15] T. Petrovic and T. Haus, “Can UAV and UGV be best buddies? Towards
heterogeneous aerial-ground cooperative robot system for complex aerial
manipulation tasks,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Inform. Control, Automat.
Robot., 2015, pp. 238–245.
[16] M. Blosch, S. Weiss, D. Scaramuzza, and R. Siegwart, “Vision based
MAV navigation in unknown and unstructured environments,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., 2010, pp. 21–28.
[17] L. Paz, P. Pini´es, J. Tard´os, and J. Neira, “Large-scale 6-DOF SLAM
with stereo-in-hand,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 946–957,
Oct. 2008.
[18] C. Forster, M. Pizzoli, and D. Scaramuzza, “SVO: Fast semi-direct monoc-
ular visual odometry,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., 2014,
pp. 15–22.
[19] C. Forster, M. Pizzoli, and D. Scaramuzza, “Air-ground localization
and map augmentation using monocular dense reconstruction,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2013, pp. 3971–3978.
[20] G. Klein and D. Murray, “Parallel tracking and mapping for small AR
workspaces,” in Proc. 6th IEEE ACM Int. Symp. Mixed Augmented Reality,
2007, pp. 225–234.
[21] R. Kuemmerle, G. Grisetti, H. Strasdat, K. Konolige, and W. Burgard,
“g2o: A general framework for graph optimization,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Automat., Shanghai, China, May 2011, pp. 3607–3613.
[22] J. Bouguet, “Pyramidal implementation of the afﬁne lucas kanade feature
tracker description of the algorithm,” Intel Corporation, vol. 5, no. 1–10,
pp. 1–10, 2001.
[23] A. Howard, “Real-time stereo visual odometry for autonomous ground ve-
hicles,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2008, pp. 3946–
3952.
[24] Y. Cheng, M. Maimone, and L. Matthies, “Visual odometry on the mars
exploration rovers—A tool to ensure accurate driving and science imag-
ing,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Mag., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 54–62, Jun. 2006.
[25] A. Milella and R. Siegwart, “Stereo-based ego-motion estimation using
pixel tracking and iterative closest point,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. Syst., 2006, pp. 1–4.
[26] S. Kohlbrecher, S. Von, J. Meyer, and U. Klingauf, “A ﬂexible and scalable
slam system with full 3D motion estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Safety, Secur. Rescue Robot., 2011, pp. 155–160.
[27] A. Segal, D. Haehnel, and S. Thrun, “Generalized-ICP,” in Proc. Robot.,
Sci. Syst., 2009, vol. 2, pp. 1–8.
[28] J. Zhang and S. Singh, “Visual-lidar odometry and mapping: Low-drift,
robust, and fast,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., 2015, pp. 2174–
2181.
[29] H. Qin et al., “A stereo and rotating laser framework for UAV navigation
in GPS denied environment,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron.
Soc., 2016, pp. 6061–6066.
[30] P. Blaer and P. Allen, “Data acquisition and view planning for 3-D model-
ing tasks,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2007, pp. 417–
422.
[31] J. Vasquez-Gomez, L. Sucar, R. Murrieta-Cid, and E. Lopez-Damian,
“Volumetric next-best-view planning for 3d object reconstruction with
positioning error,” Int. J. Adv. Robot. Syst., vol. 11, pp. 1–13, 2014.
[32] R. Martin, I. Rojas, K. Franke, and J. Hedengren, “Evolutionary view
planning for optimized UAV terrain modeling in a simulated environment,”
Remote Sens., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 26–50, 2015.
[33] S. Manyam, D. Casbeer, and K. Sundar, “Path planning for coopera-
tive routing of air-ground vehicles,” in Proc. Amer. Control Conf., 2016,
pp. 4630–4635.
[34] J. Li, G. Deng, C. Luo, Q. Lin, Q. Yan, and Z. Ming, “A hybrid path
planning method in unmanned air/ground vehicle (UAV/UGV) coopera-
tive systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 9585–9596,
Dec. 2016.
[35] H. Tanner, “Switched UAV-UGV cooperation scheme for target detection,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., 2007, pp. 3457–3462.
[36] R. Vidal, O. Shakernia, H. Kim, D. Shim, and S. Sastry, “Probabilis-
tic pursuit-evasion games: Theory, implementation, and experimental
evaluation,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Automat., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 662–669,
Oct. 2002.
[37] H. Yu, R. Beard, M. Argyle, and C. Chamberlain, “Probabilistic path
planning for cooperative target tracking using aerial and ground vehicles,”
in Proc. Amer. Control Conf., 2011, pp. 4673–4678.
[38] D. J. Barrett and R. E. Silverman, SSH, The Secure Shell: The Deﬁnitive
Guide, O’Reilly Media, Inc., Sebastopol, CA, USA, 2001.
[39] A. Nurunnabi, G. West, and D. Belton, “Robust methods for feature extrac-
tion from mobile laser scanning 3D point clouds,” Res.@ Locate, vol. 15,
pp. 109–120, 2015.
[40] Y. Yuan, “A review of trust region algorithms for optimization,” in Proc.
4th Int. Congr. Ind. Appl. Math., 2000, vol. 99, pp. 271–282.
[41] Z. Meng et al., “A two-stage optimized next-view planning framework
for 3-D unknown environment exploration, and structural reconstruction,”
IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1680–1687, Jul. 2017.
[42] C. Silpa-Anan and R. Hartley, “Optimised KD-trees for fast image descrip-
tor matching,” in Proc. CVPR IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2008, pp. 1–8.
[43] Z. Meng, H. Sun, X. Shen, Z. Chen, and M. H. Ang, “System integration:
Application towards autonomous navigation in cluttered environments,”
in Proc. IEEE/SICE Int. Symp. Syst. Integration, 2016, pp. 786–791.
[44] J. Gammell and S. Srinivasa, and T. Barfoot, “Batch informed trees (BIT*):
Sampling-based optimal planning via the heuristically guided search of
implicit random geometric graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Au-
tomat., 2015, pp. 3067–3074.
[45] N. Ratliff, M. Zucker, J. Bagnell, and S. Srinivasa, “CHOMP: Gradient
optimization techniques for efﬁcient motion planning,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Automat., 2009, pp. 489–494.
[46] P. Ogren and N. E. Leonard, “A convergent dynamic window approach
to obstacle avoidance,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 188–195,
Apr. 2005.
[47] F. Furrer, M. Burri, M. Achtelik, and R. Siegwart, Robot Operating Sys-
tem (ROS): The Complete Reference (Volume 1). New York, NY, USA:
Springer, pp. 595–625, 2016.
[48] S. Chitta, I. Sucan, and S. Cousins, “Moveit![ROS topics],” IEEE Robot.
Automat. Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 18–19, Mar. 2012.
[49] S. Hinterstoisser et al., “Model based training, detection and pose estima-
tion of texture-less 3d objects in heavily cluttered scenes,” in Proc. Asian
Conf. Comput. Vis., 2012, pp. 548–562.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
