warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1192.pdf
sha256: 7EEF39D54B4FA730B45481C0E9520F400EFF5A99F346210EDEF8E25548B17E4C
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 6
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Indoor UAV Localization Using a Tether
Xuesu Xiao1, Yiming Fan2, Jan Dufek1 and Robin Murphy1
Abstract— This paper presents an approach to localize a UAV
in indoor environments using only a quasi-taut tether. In indoor
GPS-denied environments, UAV localization usually depends on
vision-based methods combined with inertial sensing, such as
visual odometry or SLAM using 2D/3D cameras or laser range
ﬁnders. This necessitates either heavy and sophisticated sensor
payload mounted onto the UAV platform or computationally
expensive algorithms running online. In this work, we investi-
gate another indoor localization possibility for a tethered UAV:
using the tether’s sensory feedback, which is fed into a catenary-
based mechanics model, to localize the UAV in an indoor global
frame deﬁned by the tether reel center. Our localization method
is tested on a physical robot, Fotokite Pro. Our approach could
reduce the error of the state-of-the-art tether-based indoor
aerial vehicle localization by 31.12%. Since the UAV is localized
with respect to the tether reel center, our method could be used
to localize the UAV in a moving frame. So it is particularly
suitable for inter-localization within marsupial heterogeneous
robotic teams for urban search and rescue purposes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have been widely
used in an increasing number of areas, including surveil-
lance, search and rescue [1]–[4], post-disaster assessment
[5], [6], and nuclear decommissioning. UAV’s applications
are not limited in outdoor environments, but also cover
indoor spaces, which are not favorable for human access,
such as collapsed buildings in post-disaster scenarios. For
localization, UAVs applied outdoor rely on Global Position
System (GPS) and Inertia Measurement Unit (IMU) [7].
Through triangulation with multiple satellites, outdoor UAVs
can determine its location in the earth frame. The localization
error could be alleviated by integrating IMU information.
However, indoor environments are usually GPS-denied. So
localization become heavily dependent on inertia and vision
[8]–[12]. Inertia sensing is prone to drift since sensor error
accumulates over time through integration. Using vision-
based methods requires 2D/3D cameras or laser range ﬁnders
to be mounted onto the UAV platform. Extracting and
matching feature points from RGB frames and registering
point cloud add large computational overhead to the data
processing pipelines. Some vision-based methods are also
very sensitive to environmental condition changes, such
as environment illumination, background clutteredness, or
moving objects. All these problems make indoor UAV lo-
calization a challenging task.
1Xuesu
Xiao,
Jan
Dufek,
and
Robin
Murphy
are
with
the
Department
of
Computer
Science
and
Engineering,
Texas
A&M
University,
College
Station,
TX
77843 {xiaoxuesu, dufek,
robin.r.murphy}@tamu.edu
2Yiming
Fan
is
with
the
Department
of
Mechanical
Engi-
neering,
Texas
A&M
University,
College
Station,
Texas
77843
yimingfan@tamu.edu
Fig. 1.
Tethered UAV is localized using tether-based sensory feedback
including tether length, azimuth, and elevation angle. Our preliminary
localizer assumes sensed tether length, azimuth, and elevation angles are
in fact the real values. In this paper, we looks into this invalid assumption
especially with longer tether and compensate the values with a reasonable
offset.
In this paper, we propose a new sensor modality for
indoor localization of a tethered UAV, which utilizes tether-
based feedback to avoid using GPS, inertia, and vision-based
sensing. Our UAV localizer uses tether length from tether
reel encoder, tether azimuth and elevation angle from tether
angle sensor, and then feeds those sensory information into
a mechanics model to retrieve conﬁguration of an imaginary
absolutely straight tether between the origin (tether reel cen-
ter) and the UAV (Fig. 1). The computational cost introduced
is minimal. This paper assumes an ideal open space, which
means there are no obstacles between the UAV and the reel
center. To deal with more realistic obstacle-present spaces
where tether may contact the environment, the readers are
suggested to refer to the tether contact planner discussed in
[3].
This paper is organized as follows: Sec. II reviews related
work regarding indoor UAV localization and introduces a
preliminary version of our tether-based localizer. Sec. III
describes the mechanics model we use to quantify the
actual deformation of the tether instead of an ideal straight
line. Sec. IV gives implementation details of our proposed
approach. Sec. V presents experimental results used to show
the efﬁcacy of our proposed method and shows improvement
in terms of localization accuracy. Sec. VI concludes the
paper.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Austin. Downloaded on July 07,2020 at 23:07:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
II. RELATED WORK
UAVs have been widely used in after-disaster responses
[5], [6]. Urban search and rescue missions push the tra-
ditional usage of UAVs in outdoor open spaces with GPS
links into indoor cluttered GPS-denied environments. Un-
like triangulating signals from multiple satellites orbiting
around the globe [7], UAVs ﬂying indoors need to use its
proprioceptive sensing to determine its own states. Among
those, localization is a crucial part for the following controls,
navigation, planning, and higher level autonomy.
Indoor UAV localization is largely dependent on inertia
and vision-based methods. Although localization based on
IMUs is self-contained and doesn’t rely on any interaction
with external sources, IMUs are prone to errors due to out-
side condition changes such as temperature and sensor drift
caused by long-term integration. So vision-based methods
were developed using camera or laser range ﬁnder to localize
UAV using RGB and depth information: [8] matched images
from a monocular camera and recorded landmark feature
points in order to estimate the UAV’s location. [9]’s UAV
was equipped with stereo camera so the localization could
be based on triangulating two different video streams. [10]
utilized 3D model of the edges in the environments and
used a multiple hypotheses tracker to retrieve the potential
poses of the UAV from the observations in the image. [11]
augmented the IMU and downward facing mono-camera
with a planar laser range ﬁnder for localization. Vision-
based methods, however, are very sensitive to environmental
condition changes, such as illumination, and running vi-
sion algorithms is computational expensive. Ultra-WideBand
(UWB) technology was developed to help indoor UAV
localization [13]. [12] proposed to use UWB technology to
further enhance the traditional sensor modalities, including
IMU and vision. However, those techniques along with
wireless sensor networks [14], [15], infrared [16], RFID
[17], assumed localization devices were pre-installed in the
environment, which is not applicable for search and rescue
scenarios. Different ﬁltering techniques were attempted to
improve the localization accuracy based on noisy sensory
input [12], [15].
In this paper, we propose a localization technique for
tethered UAVs. In the literature, tethered UAVs were not
treated differently than its tetherless counterpart [18]. To our
best knowledge, there is no research focusing on localization
speciﬁcally for tethered UAVs. While transmitting power and
data plus serving as a failsafe, taut tether could also double
as an effective way for localization. In [1]–[3], we used
a preliminary tether-based localizer which utilized polar-
to-Cartesian coordinates transformation (Fig. 1). The idea
was using tether length Lr (from tether reel encoder), tether
elevation angle θr and azimuth angle φr (from tether angle
sensor), the 3D position of the UAV could be uniquely
determined:



x =
Lrcosθrsinφr
y =
Lrsinθr
z =
Lrcosθrcosφr
(1)
Fig. 2.
Free Body Diagram of the Tethered UAV
However, the assumption that the tether is always taut and
therefore straight does not hold all the time (Lr̸ = Ls, θr̸ =
θs), especially when the tether is long and the tether forms an
arc instead of a straight line due to increased gravitational
force (red part in Fig. 1). So the localization accuracy is
deteriorated due to invalid straight tether assumption. The
localizer proposed in this paper speciﬁcally addresses this
problem: we use a mechanics model to compensate the offset
in tether length and elevation angle and improve localization
accuracy compared to the preliminary localizer.
III. TETHER DEFORMATION MODEL
This section gives a detailed mechanics model we use to
quantify the differences in sensed and real tether values. We
start with a free body diagram analysis, which calculates
the force from tether pulling the UAV down (tether tension)
using UAV conﬁguration and sensory feedback. Based on
that we further introduce our tether deformation model. The
model takes calculated tether tension and sensed elevation
angle as input, and output the real elevation angle and tether
length.
A. Free Body Diagram
A UAV ﬂying with a taut tether needs to hover with an
angle with respect to the horizontal plane since the propellors
need to provide a horizontal force to balance the horizontal
component of tether tension acting on the UAV. As shown
in Fig. 2, we denote the force created by the propellers F,
tether tension T, and the gravity of the UAV G. The angles
of F and T with respect to the horizontal plane is denoted as
β and θ, respectively. θ is simply the sensed elevation angle
described above.
To balance both x and y directions, we have

Fcosβ = Tcosθ
Fsinβ = Tsinθ + G
(2)
β is available from UAV onboard IMU and θ from tether
angle sensor. By solving the equations, we can calculate F
and T:
(
F =
G
sinβ−tanθcosβ
T =
Gcosβ
sinβcosθ−tanθcosθcosβ
(3)
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Austin. Downloaded on July 07,2020 at 23:07:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
B. Mechanics Model
In order to describe the shape of the tether, catenary
curve is considered. The catenary curve was ﬁrst introduced
by Leibniz, Huygens and Johann Bernoulli in 1691 and it
has been widely used in predicting geometric response of
hanging ropes, chains and cables under the force of gravity.
Assuming the gravity is uniform, and the two free ends of the
tether are hanged on the same altitude. Based on symmetry,
only half of the catenary is needed for analysis.
Fig. 3a shows the free body diagram of the tether. Point B
is the UAV end where the tether is suspended, while point A
is the axisymmetric end. The tether is subject to gravity W,
which is assumed to be uniformly distributed as shown. The
tension acting on the tether is noted as T0 and T1, where
T0 is at end A and T1 at end B. T1 is the reaction force of
T acting on the UAV, as mentioned in the last subsection,
so they have same magnitude but opposite directions. By
applying equilibrium equations to the tether, we can get:
ΣFx = 0
⇒
T1cosθ −T0 = 0
ΣFy = 0
⇒
T1sinθ −W = 0
(4)
where θ is the same departure angle of tension T1 with
respect to the horizontal axis, which we can measure through
tether angle sensor. By rewriting Eqn. 4 we have:

T1cosθ
=
T0
T1sinθ
=
ρLg
(5)
where ρ is the linear density of the tether, g is the
gravitational acceleration and L is the total tether length.
A closer look into the free body diagram of one small
piece of tether segment is shown in Fig. 3b. The equilibrium
equations are:
ΣFx = 0 ⇒
Tx+∆xcosθx+∆x −Txcosθx
=
0
ΣFy = 0 ⇒
Tx+∆xsinθx+∆x −Txsinθx −∆W
=
0
(6)
where Tx and Tx+∆x are the tension and θx and θx+∆x
the angle with respect to the horizontal axis at both ends of
the segment. For the second equation in Eqn. 6, move ∆W
to the right hand side and divide both sides by ∆x, the left
hand side is the deﬁnition of derivation of Txsinθx:
d
dx(Txsinθx) = d
dxWx
(7)
Tx can be expressed as a function of T0 and θx:
Tx =
T0
cosθx
(8)
The geometry of the tether segment gives us:
(
dL =
q
d2x + d2y =
q
1 + ( dy
dx)2dx
tanθx = dy
dx
(9)
Substituting Tx in Eqn. 7 with Eqn. 8, we get:
d
dx(T0tanθx) = d
dxWx = ρgdL
(10)
And by substituting Eqn. 9 into Eqn. 10, we have:
d
dx(dy
dx) = ρg
T0
r
1 + (dy
dx)2dx
(11)
The solution to Eqn. 11 is the catenary curve and can be
expressed as:
y = acoshx
a
(12)
where a =
T0
ρg is a coefﬁcient that depends on tension
T0, tether linear density ρ, and gravitational acceleration g.
In order to get the coordinate of the UAV end, we take the
derivative of Eqn. 12:
dy
dx = sinhx
a
(13)
By comparing Eqn. 13 and Eqn. 9, we get:
tanθx = sinhx
a
(14)
Eqn. 14 is a general form and speciﬁcally at the UAV end
B, θx is the departure angle θ, and x coordinate is equal to
Lx:
tanθ = sinhLx
a
(15)
Based on Eqn. 15 and catenary curve, the x and y
coordinates of the UAV end B takes the form:

Lx =
aln(tanθ +
√
tan2θ + 1)
Ly =
acosh Lx
a −acosh0
(16)
The real elevation angle θr and tether length Lr would be
corrected as:
(
θr =
atan( Ly
Lx )
Lr =
q
L2x + L2y
(17)
while real azimuth angle φr is still equal to sensed value
φs. Using arc length equation, we could compute the actual
length of the curved tether S:
S =
Z Lx
0
p
1 + f ′(x)2dx
=
Z Lx
0
r
1 + sinh2 x
adx
=asinhLx
a
(18)
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
This section gives details about the implementation of
our proposed localization method. We use a physical robot,
Fotokite Pro, with its provided Software Development Kit
(SDK) to implement our approach.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Austin. Downloaded on July 07,2020 at 23:07:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
(a) Free Body Diagram of UAV Tether
(b) Free Body Diagram of Tether Segment
Fig. 3.
Free Body Diagram of the Entire Tether and One Piece Tether Segment: both experience tension from two ends and uniformly distributed gravity
A. Sensory Input
1) Tether Length Ls: Using the encoder reading of the
tether reel from the SDK, we are able to calculate the relative
tether length with respect to its initial state. If we initialize
tether length to be zero, the absolute tether length equals to
the relative value.
2) Tether Angles θs and φs: The SDK also provides two
tether angle measurements, azimuth and elevation, measured
directly from the attachment point of the tether to the vehicle.
Elevation angle is with respect to gravity and azimuth to
initialization. We convert the elevation angle based on our
deﬁnition with respect to horizontal plane.
3) Vehicular Lean Angle β: The UAV conﬁguration is
given in the form of a quaternion z = a + bi + cj + dk.
The normal vector pointing up nv = [0, 1, 0]T expressed in
the vehicle frame could be transformed to the global frame
by multiplying the corresponding rotation matrix R of the
quaternion:
ng = [xg, yg, zg]T = R ∗nv
(19)
So the lean angle is
β = arcsin(
yg
q
x2g + y2g + z2g
)
(20)
B. Length and Angle Correction
We take the sensed elevation angle θs and computed lean
angle β to compute tension T = T0 using Eqn. 3. Here
the UAV weighs 6N. Then we feed them into the model
described in Sec. III. Tether linear density ρ is measured to
be 0.0061kg/m. Eqn. 17 gives the ﬁnal corrected elevation
angle θr. The control for tether length need to be based on
the arc length S (Eqn. 18). Azimuth angle remains the same.
C. Navigation
In order to navigate the UAV to target point (x, y, z), we
compute the desired elevation θd and azimuth φd values by:
(
θd =
arcsin(
y
√
x2+y2+z2 )
φd =
atan2( x
z )
(21)
Fig. 4.
Experimental Setup: UAV ﬂying in a motion capture studio with
a tether pulled down by gravity
The desired tether arc length Ld is given by Eqn. 18. By
comparing the desired values with corrected current sensory
input, three individual PID controllers are implemented to
drive Lr, θr, and φr to their desired values.
V. EXPERIMENTS
In order to show the efﬁcacy of our proposed approach, we
conduct experiments in a motion capture studio to capture
motion ground truth (Fig. 4). The studio is equipped with
12 OptiTrack Flex 13 cameras running at 120 Hz. The
1280×1024 high resolution cameras with a 56◦Field of View
provide less than 0.3mm positional error and cover the whole
2.5×2.5×2.5m space.
Since our approach does not affect azimuth angle, we
ﬁx the experiments at a constant azimuth. All experiment
points are chosen on a horizontal plane with -45◦azimuth
angle (Fig. 5 left). Within this plane, points are located on
a grid pattern with an interval of 0.5m (Fig. 5 right). We
ﬂy the UAV, Fotokite Pro, to and hover at each individual
experiment points, using the preliminary and our proposed
localizer. Ground truth positional data is recorded by the
motion capture system.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Austin. Downloaded on July 07,2020 at 23:07:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
Fig. 5.
Experimental points are chosen within a horizontal plane with -
45◦azimuth angle. Within this plane, points are distributed over a grid with
0.5m interval.
48 localization trials are performed with 48 ground truth
positions collected, 24 using preliminary localizer and the
other 24 our new approach. Due to the turbulence created
by the propellors in a conﬁned indoor studio space, the
UAV wobbles at the target location. So for each data point,
we record the motion of Fotokite as a rigid body using the
motion capture system for 5 seconds after it stabilizes at the
target location. Average value is taken over the 600 tracked
points (5 seconds at 120 Hz). All 48 localized points along
with the 24 target points from our physical experiments are
displayed in Fig. 6. While blue points designate the ideal
target points where the UAV should localize and hover at,
red and green points denote localization results from the
preliminary and our proposed localizer, respectively. Red
and green straight line segments illustrate the correspondence
between localization results and target point.
As Fig. 6a shows, green straight line segments are usually
shorter than the red ones connected with the same blue
points. This means improved localization accuracy using
our proposed localizer. A closer look into the experimental
results are shown in Fig. 6b and 6c. Fig. 6b is the perpen-
dicular view toward -45◦azimuth plane. It could be observed
that red points are always lower than blue points. This is
the reason caused by the invalid straight tether assumption
(Fig. 1). The real elevation angle is always smaller than the
sensed value, so given a certain tether length the preliminary
localizer thinks the UAV were at a higher position, but in
fact it’s lower. Green points achieved by our new model are
distributed around blue points, with a smaller distance. This
shows that our proposed localizer overcomes the problem
caused by invalid straight tether assumption and reduces the
localization error in the vertical direction. Fig. 6c shows
the top town view of the 48 trials and directly illustrate
the localization accuracy in the horizontal plane. There is
not much difference to be observed between red and green
points with respect to the blue ones since our localizer
doesn’t deal with azimuth angle correction. The slightly
denser distribution within 0 and -45◦is due to tether azimuth
and vehicular yaw angle initialization error. Overall speaking,
the improvement of localization accuracy is summarized in
Tab. I.
As mentioned in Sec. II, accuracy of the preliminary
localizer is deteriorated with increasing tether length. Fig.
TABLE I
AVERAGE TRACKING ERROR
Preliminary
Localizer
Proposed
Method
Improvement
Average
Localization
Error (m)
0.5335
0.3675
31.12%
7 looks into this effect in detail. In general, localization
error from the preliminary localizer is worse (red points)
than our proposed method (green points). A line is ﬁtted
to the results of each localizer using linear regression. As
we can see, the red line indicates that longer tether length
has a signiﬁcant negative effect on localization accuracy,
while our proposed method is not sensitive to increasing
tether length. Our proposed localizer has a limited average
localization error within 0.4m. This is the best hovering
stability achievable by Fotokite’s built-in controller measured
by experiments [3].
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a novel indoor localization
scheme for UAVs operating with a quasi-straight tether. This
localizer is based on polar-to-Cartesian coordinates conver-
sion and uses tether sensory information including tether
length, elevation and azimuth angles. More importantly, a
mechanics model is built to quantify the inevitable tether
deformation when the tether is long and pulled down by
gravity and therefore forming an arc instead of an ideal
straight line. This model is capable of correcting the mea-
sured elevation angle and tether length and thus improve
localization accuracy. The improved localization accuracy is
demonstrated by experiments on a physical tethered UAV,
Fotokite Pro. The results indicate that our model is able to
ameliorate localization accuracy by 31.12% and effectively
eliminate the negative effect of increased tether length on
localization result. The average localization error achieved by
our proposed method is limited within the hovering stability
tolerance of our particular UAV platform.
In future work, more sophisticated mechanics model will
be used to further improve the tracking accuracy, such
as Finite Element Analysis. Machine learning approaches
are another research direction to model the mapping from
UAV tether’s sensory feedback to UAV’s global position.
For example, Deep Neural Networks could be trained using
tether sensor values and ground truth position collected by
motion capture system. This catenary-based localizer will be
embedded into a marsupial heterogeneous robotic team for
urban search and rescue purposes including a primary ground
robot and the UAV in order to improve the tethered UAV’s
higher level state estimation, controls, navigation, planning,
and autonomy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by NSF grant IIS 1426756, DOE
Science of Safety Grant 1710670, and DOE DE-EM0004483.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Austin. Downloaded on July 07,2020 at 23:07:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
0.5
1
2.5
0.5
y (m)
1.5
Localization Results
2
1
z (m)
2
x (m)
1.5
1.5
1
2
0.5
2.5
Preliminary Localizer
Our Localizer
Targets
(a) 3-D Illustration of Experimental Results
1.5
0.5
2
1
y (m)
Localization Results
2.5
0.5
2
1
z (m)
1.5
1.5
x (m)
1
2
0.5
2.5
Preliminary Localizer
Our Localizer
Targets
(b) -45◦Azimuth Plane Horizontal View
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
z (m)
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x (m)
Localization Results
Preliminary Localizer
Our Localizer
Targets
(c) Top Down View
Fig. 6.
Localization Results from 48 Experimental Trials: blue points designate the target points the UAV should localize and hover at. Red points are
the localization results using the preliminary localizer. Green points are resulted by our proposed mechanics-based approach. Small straight line segments
connect localization results with their corresponding targets.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Tether Length (m)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Localization Error (m)
Localization Error Vs. Tether Length
Preliminary Localizer
Our Localizer
Fig. 7.
Localization Error in Terms of Tether Length: Preliminary
localizer’s error (red) increases with longer tether, while tether length does
not have a signiﬁcant effect on our proposed method (green).
The authors would like to thank Mohamed Suhail for his help
with the motion capture system.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Xiao, J. Dufek, and R. Murphy, “Visual servoing for teleoperation
using a tethered uav,” in Safety, Security and Rescue Robotics (SSRR),
2017 IEEE International Symposium on.
IEEE, 2017.
[2] J. Dufek, X. Xiao, and R. Murphy, “Visual pose stabilization of
tethered small unmanned aerial system to assist drowning victim
recovery,” in Safety, Security and Rescue Robotics (SSRR), 2017 IEEE
International Symposium on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 116–122.
[3] X. Xiao, J. Dufek, and R. Murphy, “Motion planning for a uav with
a straight or kinked tether,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on.
IEEE, 2018.
[4] X. Xiao, J. Dufek, T. Woodbury, and R. Murphy, “Uav assisted usv
visual navigation for marine mass casualty incident response,” in
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 6105–6110.
[5] K. S. Pratt, R. R. Murphy, J. L. Burke, J. Craighead, C. Grifﬁn, and
S. Stover, “Use of tethered small unmanned aerial system at berkman
plaza ii collapse,” in Safety, Security and Rescue Robotics, 2008. SSRR
2008. IEEE International Workshop on.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 134–139.
[6] R. Murphy, J. Dufek, T. Sarmiento, G. Wilde, X. Xiao, J. Braun,
L. Mullen, R. Smith, S. Allred, J. Adams et al., “Two case studies
and gaps analysis of ﬂood assessment for emergency management
with small unmanned aerial systems,” in Safety, Security, and Rescue
Robotics (SSRR), 2016 IEEE International Symposium on.
IEEE,
2016, pp. 54–61.
[7] A. Nemra and N. Aouf, “Robust ins/gps sensor fusion for uav
localization using sdre nonlinear ﬁltering,” IEEE Sensors Journal,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 789–798, 2010.
[8] J.-O. Lee, T. Kang, K.-H. Lee, S. K. Im, and J. Park, “Vision-
based indoor localization for unmanned aerial vehicles,” Journal of
Aerospace Engineering, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 373–377, 2010.
[9] S. Azrad, M. Fadhil, F. Kendoul, and K. Nonami, “Quadrotor uav
indoor localization using embedded stereo camera,” in Applied Me-
chanics and Materials, vol. 629.
Trans Tech Publ, 2014, pp. 270–
277.
[10] C. Teuliere, E. Marchand, and L. Eck, “3-d model-based tracking for
uav indoor localization,” IEEE Transactions on cybernetics, vol. 45,
no. 5, pp. 869–879, 2015.
[11] F. Wang, J. Cui, S. K. Phang, B. M. Chen, and T. H. Lee, “A mono-
camera and scanning laser range ﬁnder based uav indoor navigation
system,” in Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), 2013 International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 694–701.
[12] A. Benini, A. Mancini, and S. Longhi, “An imu/uwb/vision-based
extended kalman ﬁlter for mini-uav localization in indoor environment
using 802.15. 4a wireless sensor network,” Journal of Intelligent &
Robotic Systems, vol. 70, no. 1-4, pp. 461–476, 2013.
[13] J. Tiemann, F. Schweikowski, and C. Wietfeld, “Design of an uwb
indoor-positioning system for uav navigation in gnss-denied environ-
ments,” in Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), 2015
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–7.
[14] J. L. Rullan-Lara, G. Sanahuja, R. Lozano, S. Salazar, R. Garcia-
Hernandez, and J. A. Ruz-Hernandez, “Indoor localization of a quadro-
tor based on wsn: a real-time application,” International Journal of
Advanced Robotic Systems, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 48, 2013.
[15] J.-L. Rull´an-Lara, S. Salazar, and R. Lozano, “Real-time localization
of an uav using kalman ﬁlter and a wireless sensor network,” Journal
of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, vol. 65, no. 1-4, pp. 283–293, 2012.
[16] N. Kirchner and T. Furukawa, “Infrared localisation for indoor uavs,”
in Proc. of the 1st Int. Conf. on Sensing Technology, 2005.
[17] J. S. Choi, B. R. Son, H. K. Kang, and D. H. Lee, “Indoor localization
of unmanned aerial vehicle based on passive uhf rﬁd systems,”
in Ubiquitous Robots and Ambient Intelligence (URAI), 2012 9th
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 188–189.
[18] L. Zikou, C. Papachristos, and A. Tzes, “The power-over-tether system
for powering small uavs: tethering-line tension control synthesis,” in
Control and Automation (MED), 2015 23th Mediterranean Conference
on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 681–687.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Austin. Downloaded on July 07,2020 at 23:07:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
