warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1277.pdf
sha256: 6620A6B4028C9BE18ADD9647913020602092DAEBBE8B01B4DD00D2F6C774A041
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 26
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Academic Editors: Mou Chen,
Xiwang Dong, Fei Gao and
Yongzhao Hua
Received: 30 January 2026
Revised: 4 March 2026
Accepted: 20 March 2026
Published: 31 March 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Article
A Physics-Guided Aeromagnetic Interference Compensation
Method for Geomagnetic Sensing in GNSS-Denied UAV
Swarm Systems
Shiyao Wang 1,2
, Liran Ma 1,2,*, Yue Wang 3, Dongguang Li 3 and Jianbin Luo 1,2,*
1
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China;
shiyao-w21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
2
State Key Laboratory of Tribology in Advanced Equipment, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
School of Mechatronics Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China;
jackwy@bit.edu.cn (Y.W.); lidongguang@bit.edu.cn (D.L.)
*
Correspondence: maliran@tsinghua.edu.cn (L.M.); luojb@tsinghua.edu.cn (J.L.)
Highlights
What are the main findings?
•
A physics-guided multi-branch neural network (PG-TLNet) is proposed to decompose
aeromagnetic interference into a physics-constrained linear subspace and a nonlinear
residual subspace, enabling structured and interpretable compensation under strong
onboard electromagnetic interference.
•
Extensive flight experiments under interference amplitudes up to 1000 nT show
that PG-TLNet reduces residual errors to the 20–30 nT level, outperforming con-
ventional Tolles–Lawson and neural-network-based compensation methods while
maintaining sub-millisecond inference latency (~94 µs per sample) and improving
cross-node measurement consistency, thereby supporting swarm-oriented magnetic
sensing deployment.
What are the implications of the main findings?
•
The integration of structured physical modeling with lightweight deep learning of-
fers a practical pathway toward real-time, embedded interference suppression in
electromagnetically complex aerial platforms. The achieved compensation fidelity
provides a stable and reliable magnetic sensing foundation for geomagnetic naviga-
tion in GNSS-denied environments, where satellite-based positioning is unavailable
or unreliable.
•
By homogenizing magnetic measurement quality across sensing nodes under identical
maneuvering conditions, the proposed framework facilitates cooperative geomagnetic
sensing and localization in UAV swarm systems.
Abstract
Geomagnetic navigation is a promising alternative for positioning and localization of
UAV swarm systems in GNSS-denied environments. However, strong and heterogeneous
electromagnetic interference generated by onboard power, propulsion, and electronic sub-
systems severely degrades magnetic measurement fidelity, limiting the achievable accuracy
of cooperative UAV swarm navigation. To address this challenge, this paper proposes
PG-TLNet, a physics-guided aeromagnetic interference compensation framework based
on the extended Tolles–Lawson (T–L) model. By integrating onboard state information
(current, voltage, and attitude) with magnetic measurements through physics-consistency
constraints and a lightweight multi-branch convolutional neural network, the framework
Drones 2026, 10, 252
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.2]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
2 of 26
enables robust real-time compensation under strong and time-varying interference while
remaining suitable for resource-constrained UAV nodes. Experimental validation using
multiple scalar magnetometers under heterogeneous interference conditions, with am-
plitudes up to 1000 nT, shows that PG-TLNet consistently outperforms the conventional
T–L model across all sensing nodes, maintaining residual magnetic interference at ap-
proximately 0–30 nT under long-duration and highly dynamic operations. The proposed
method achieves an improvement ratio (IR) of up to 15 with an end-to-end inference
latency below 94 µs. These results indicate that PG-TLNet meets the practical measure-
ment fidelity requirements for geomagnetic navigation in GNSS-denied environments.
By ensuring reliable and consistent magnetic measurements at the individual UAV node
level, the proposed framework establishes a practical sensing foundation for geomag-
netic navigation and distributed magnetic sensing in UAV swarm systems operating in
GNSS-denied environments.
Keywords: UAV systems; geomagnetic navigation; GNSS-denied environments; aeromagnetic
interference compensation; physics-guided neural networks; multi-sensor consistency
1. Introduction
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have become an important platform for aeromag-
netic surveying and geomagnetic navigation due to their low operational cost, flexible
deployment, and ability to operate at low altitudes and in complex terrains [1]. Com-
pared with traditional manned airborne surveys, UAV-based magnetic sensing systems
enable dense spatial sampling and rapid mission execution, making them attractive for
applications such as mineral exploration, environmental monitoring, unexploded ord-
nance detection, and auxiliary navigation in GNSS-denied environments. Advances in
geomagnetic sensing technologies can further expand the potential of large AI models
and LLM-enabled UAV systems by improving the reliability of low-level perception for
autonomous aerial platforms, enabling distributed surveying, cooperative mapping, and
multi-platform sensing in challenging environments [2,3].
However, the compact structure and electric propulsion systems of UAV platforms
inevitably introduce strong platform-induced magnetic interference, which significantly
degrades the accuracy and reliability of aeromagnetic measurements [4]. In practical
UAV systems, magnetometers are often installed inside or close to the airframe due
to constraints related to aerodynamics, payload capacity, and system integration [5].
Consequently, magnetic sensors are exposed to multiple interference sources, including
attitude-dependent airframe magnetization, onboard electric currents, electronic speed
controllers, and maneuver-induced transient electromagnetic effects [6–14]. Moreover,
UAV platforms exhibit substantial heterogeneity in terms of size, structural configura-
tion, propulsion systems, sensor placement, and onboard equipment. Such heterogeneity
leads to highly variable magnetic interference characteristics across different platforms,
making platform-specific or offline-calibrated compensation methods difficult to gener-
alize and potentially causing measurement inconsistency in multi-platform geomagnetic
sensing systems.
The Tolles–Lawson (T–L) model is the most widely used aeromagnetic compensation
method and has demonstrated reliable performance in traditional manned airborne surveys.
By representing platform magnetic interference as a linear combination of attitude-related
basis functions, the T–L model provides clear physical interpretability and high compu-
tational efficiency. However, Gnadt et al. from MIT pointed out that under conditions
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.3]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
3 of 26
involving strong time-varying interference and high-dynamic flight maneuvers, the con-
ventional T–L model exhibits significant limitations [15]. Specifically, it struggles to capture
nonlinear and transient disturbances induced by electric propulsion systems and rapid
maneuvers, and its performance may degrade significantly when the interference intensity
becomes severe [16–19].
To address transient interference, research groups led by Canciani [20] and Siebler [21]
at the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT), as well as Xu et al. from the Chinese
Academy of Sciences [22], proposed Kalman filter–based approaches to dynamically up-
date T–L parameters. Although these methods improve adaptability to time-varying in-
terference, their performance still deteriorates under strong-interference conditions. More
recently, data-driven approaches based on machine learning and neural networks have
been investigated to enhance aeromagnetic compensation performance [23,24]. Hezel [25],
Zhang [26], and Ma [27] demonstrated the feasibility of neural networks for modeling mag-
netic interference. However, purely data-driven models often lack physical interpretability
and robustness, and their generalization capability may be insufficient when operating
conditions vary across heterogeneous UAV platforms. In addition, high computational
complexity may hinder real-time onboard deployment, which is a critical requirement for
practical UAV sensing systems [28–30].
Motivated by these challenges, this paper proposes a physics-guided neural net-
work framework based on the Tolles–Lawson model, termed PG-TLNet, for real-time
aeromagnetic interference compensation. The proposed approach combines the phys-
ical interpretability of the classical T–L model with the nonlinear modeling capability
of a lightweight neural network. By jointly exploiting electrical signals (current and
voltage), kinematic information, and magnetic measurements, PG-TLNet establishes a
physics-guided mapping between platform states and magnetic interference. In this study,
multiple scalar magnetometers mounted on a single aerial platform are used to emulate
distributed magnetic sensing nodes. This configuration enables controlled evaluation of
cross-node compensation consistency while maintaining identical flight dynamics and
environmental conditions for all sensors. Such a setup provides a practical approximation
of multi-node sensing scenarios relevant to future multi-UAV geomagnetic sensing systems.
The proposed PG-TLNet framework differs from conventional hybrid linear–neural
models in three key aspects. First, instead of treating the neural network as a generic
residual corrector, the magnetic interference field is explicitly decomposed into a
physics-constrained linear subspace and a nonlinear transient subspace. The extended
Tolles–Lawson model captures interpretable linear interference components, while the neu-
ral network focuses on modeling nonlinear residual disturbances. Second, a physics-aware
multi-branch architecture is introduced to separately process magnetic, electrical, and
kinematic inputs before fusion, enabling decoupled representation of heterogeneous inter-
ference mechanisms. Third, the proposed framework is specifically designed for real-time
onboard deployment. With sub-millisecond inference latency, PG-TLNet satisfies the
computational requirements of UAV platforms while maintaining robust compensation
performance under strong time-varying interference.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: (1) A physics-guided
aeromagnetic interference decomposition framework is proposed, in which the interference
field is separated into a linear physical subspace and a nonlinear residual subspace. The
extended Tolles–Lawson model captures interpretable linear interference components,
while the neural network models nonlinear transient disturbances. (2) A physics-aware
multi-branch architecture is developed to model heterogeneous onboard interference
sources. Magnetic, electrical, and maneuver-related signals are processed in dedicated
branches prior to fusion, enabling decoupled representation of different interference mech-
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.4]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
4 of 26
anisms. (3) A structured residual-learning strategy is introduced to constrain the neural
network to predict only the compensation residual after physical-model regression, im-
proving learning stability and avoiding redundancy between physical and data-driven
modeling. (4) Extensive flight experiments demonstrate that the proposed PG-TLNet frame-
work achieves accurate aeromagnetic compensation with sub-millisecond inference latency
under strong time-varying interference conditions, indicating its suitability for real-time
onboard deployment in UAV platforms.
2. Extended T-L Linear Regression Model
Let the magnetic sensor measurement at time t be denoted as Bt, while the desired
geomagnetic signal for navigation tasks is denoted as Be. The difference between the two
corresponds to the interference magnetic field generated by the carrier platform, Ba [31].
The relationship among these variables can be expressed as:
∥Be∥≈∥Bt∥−Ba·Bt
∥Bt∥
(1)
The unit vector of the total field can be expressed as
Bt
∥Bt∥= [cosx, cosy, cosz]T =
[µ1, µ2, µ3]T, which is measured using a tri-axial fluxgate magnetometer. The Tolles–Lawson
(T–L) model, proposed in the 1950s, remains the most widely adopted approach for compen-
sating platform-generated magnetic interference in airborne magnetometry and navigation.
In this framework, is regarded as a quasi-static error consisting of three components: the
permanent field Bperm, the induced field Bind, and the eddy-current field Beddy [32]. Since
the induced and eddy-current terms generally vary slowly with platform attitude and
motion, the term “static” refers to the deterministic functional representation of the in-
terference field rather than strict time invariance. In the Tolles–Lawson framework, the
platform-generated magnetic interference is modeled through its projection onto the direc-
tion of the total magnetic field. Accordingly, the scalar interference term can be expressed
as the sum of permanent, induced, and eddy-current components:
Ba·Bt
∥Bt∥= Bperm + Bind + Beddy = Binterf
(2)
The permanent magnetic field arises from remanent magnetization of aircraft materials,
forming an inherent field that does not vary with the external field. In the body coordinate
system, this contribution can be treated as a constant vector. By projecting the constant
Bperm onto the unit direction [µ1, µ2, µ3]T and introducing unknown coefficients σi, the
scalar term can be expanded as Equation (6).
µ1 =
Bx
∥Bt∥=
Bx
q
B2x + B2y + B2z
(3)
µ2 =
By
∥Bt∥=
By
q
B2x + B2y + B2z
(4)
µ3 =
Bz
∥Bt∥=
Bz
q
B2x + B2y + B2z
(5)
Bperm = σ1µ1 + σ2µ2 + σ3µ3
(6)
In addition, the external geomagnetic field induces magnetization in ferromagnetic
and paramagnetic components, producing a secondary induced field Bind. In the T–L
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.5]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
5 of 26
expansion, this contribution appears as a quadratic basis function of the direction cosines,
scaled by |B t|, as shown in Equation (7).
Bind = ∥Bt∥(σ4µ12 + σ5µ22 + σ6µ32 + σ7µ1·µ2 + σ8µ1·µ3 + σ9µ2·µ3)
(7)
The eddy-current field arises when a time-varying external magnetic field induces
circulating currents in conducting structures. According to the T–L model, this effect can
be expressed as Equation (8).
Beddy = ∥Bt∥(σ10µ1·µ1′ + σ11µ1·µ2′ + σ12µ1·µ3′ + σ13µ2·µ1′ + σ14µ2·µ2′ + σ15µ2·µ3′ + σ16µ3·µ1′ + σ17µ3·µ2′ + σ18µ3·µ3′)
(8)
The complete physical model is summarized in Equation (9).
Binterf = σ1µ1 + σ2µ2 + σ3µ3
|
{z
}
permanent magnetic field
+ ∥Bt∥(σ4µ12 + σ5µ22 + σ6µ32 + σ7µ1µ2 + σ8µ1µ3 + σ9µ2µ3)
|
{z
}
induced field
+∥Bt∥(σ10µ1µ′
1 + σ11µ1µ′
2 + σ12µ1µ′
3 + σ13µ2µ′
1 + σ14µ2µ′
2 + σ15µ2·µ′
3 + σ16µ3µ′
1 + σ17µ3µ′
2+σ18µ3µ′
3)
|
{z
}
eddy−current f ield
= ATL(t)σ
(9)
To solve for the coefficient σ, calibration flights are required. Typically, data are collected
through four directional maneuvers [33,34], each including three yaw deflections of ±5◦, three roll
maneuvers of ±10◦, and three pitch maneuvers of ±5◦. A schematic of the calibration flight is shown
in Figure 1a, and an example of the actual flight trajectory is given in Figure 1b.
yaws(±5°)
rolls(±10°)
pitches(±5°)
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 1. Figure-of-Merit (FOM) flight configuration and attitude responses: (a) Maneuver sequence
of the FOM flight, where the colored segments indicate the maneuver amplitudes: yaw (±5◦), roll
(±10◦), and pitch (±5◦); (b) Actual flight trajectory in the UTM coordinate frame; (c) Measured
attitude profiles, including pitch, roll, and yaw, over the flight duration.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.6]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
6 of 26
To mitigate the ill-conditioned estimation and variance inflation caused by column correlations
in the regression matrix, Truncated Singular Value Decomposition (TSVD) with strong robustness is
employed for the initial coefficient estimation.
σk =
k
∑
i=1
ui·∥Bt∥
αi
vi
(10)
Here, ui and vi denote the left and right singular vectors, respectively, αi is the singular value,
and k is the truncation order used to filter out the high-noise directions associated with small singular
values, thereby alleviating the ill-posedness caused by multicollinearity. In this study, k = 16
was selected.
In practical aircraft applications, eddy-current and induced interference are not only related to
flight attitude or magnetic field direction, but are also strongly driven by variations in the currents
and voltages of onboard electronic devices. The complex coupling among electronics and systems
produces interference signals with their own dynamics and time scales, which cannot be fully captured
by the T–L model. When carrier-induced interference is relatively weak, the T–L model approximates
the geomagnetic field with the measured field [15], as expressed in Equation (1). However, under
strong interference, this approximation no longer holds, resulting in model failure. Therefore, it is
necessary to augment the T–L model with additional measurable system signal terms.
According to the Biot–Savart law, the magnetic field generated by a current-carrying conductor
at the sensor location r can be expressed as:
B(r, t) = µ0
4π
I Idl × R
R3
(11)
where µ0 denotes the permeability of free space, I(t) is the electric current, dl is the differential
element of the conductor, R = r −r′ represents the vector from the current element to the sensor
location, and R = ∥R ∥. For a fixed conductor geometry and sensor position, the geometric integral
depends only on the spatial configuration, while the current I(t) appears as a multiplicative factor.
When multiple current loops or current paths with currents I1(t), I2(t), . . . , IK(t) are present, the
total magnetic field measured at the sensor can be expressed as the linear superposition of their
individual contributions:
B(r, t) =
K
∑
k=1
Ik(t)·( µ0
4π
I
Ck
Idl × R
R3
)
(12)
Defining the geometric integral as a constant coefficient term:
Ck(r) = µ0
4π
I
Ck
Idl × R
R3
(13)
The magnetic field at the sensor can be written in a compact linear form as:
B(r, t) =
K
∑
k=1
Ik(t)·Ck(r)
(14)
where Ck(r) represents an equivalent geometric coupling vector determined by the conductor ge-
ometry and sensor location. In practice, this coupling term is generally unknown or difficult to
measure directly due to complex wiring layouts and structural configurations. However, in real
airborne platforms, effects such as eddy currents, electromagnetic shielding, and structural damping
introduce temporal delays and memory effects in the current-to-magnetic-field coupling. These
dynamic effects cannot be adequately captured by the static relationship in Equation (14). To account
for such behavior, the coupling between the k-th current and the measured magnetic field is modeled
as the response of a linear time-invariant (LTI) system driven by the input current. This assumption
represents a first-order approximation of the current–magnetic-field coupling under normal operat-
ing conditions, where saturation, hysteresis, and temperature-induced nonlinearities are relatively
small compared with the dominant interference components. Residual nonlinear effects that cannot
be captured by this LTI approximation are subsequently handled by the neural residual-learning
module. Denoting the impulse response of the k-th current path as hk(τ), which characterizes the
dynamic coupling between the current input and the induced magnetic field. In practice, the effective
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.7]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
7 of 26
parameters associated with this coupling are implicitly estimated during model training. The total
current-induced magnetic interference can then be expressed as:
B(t) =
K
∑
k=1
(hk·Ik)(t) =
K
∑
k=1
Z ∞
0
hk(τ)Ik(t −τ)dτ
(15)
where hk(τ) denotes the impulse response describing the current-to-field coupling of the k-th electrical
path. Treating the convolution response of each current channel as a system feature, the measured
response feature associated with the k-th current path is defined as:
ameas, k(t) ≜
Z ∞
0
hk(τ)Ik(t −τ)dτ
(16)
and the corresponding system signal feature vector is constructed as:
Ameas(t) =

ameas, 1(t), ameas, 2(t), . . . , ameas, k(t)

(17)
The overall magnetic interference field is assumed to be a linear combination of the
Tolles–Lawson (T–L) terms and the current-induced responses. By augmenting the T–L model
with system signal features, the extended interference model can be expressed as:
Binterf(t) = ATL(t)σ + Ameas(t)γ
(18)
Here, Ameas(t) consists of functions constructed from the measured onboard currents and
their combinations, while γ represents the unknown coupling parameters characterizing the linear
mapping from system currents to magnetic interference. These parameters are updated online using
recursive least squares (RLS), enabling adaptive modeling of induced and eddy-current interference
under time-varying operating conditions. Treating system signals as known time-varying inputs
yields an engineerable, interpretable, and online-updatable formulation of the current-induced
interference term Ameas(t)γ.
3. Proposed Method
The extended Tolles–Lawson (T–L) linear regression model can effectively suppress physically
interpretable linear interference components. However, under strong platform-induced interference
and high-dynamic operating conditions, complex nonlinear, time-varying, and partially unobserved
residuals often remain. These residuals cannot be adequately captured by fixed-basis linear models
and often lead to performance degradation in real-time applications. Neural networks are well suited
for modeling such residual interference, as they can automatically extract nonlinear features from local
temporal patterns, capture short-term temporal coupling, and be efficiently deployed on embedded
computing platforms. Importantly, learning these residual components at the single-sensor level
enables each aerial platform to provide stable and consistent magnetic measurements, which is a
prerequisite for cooperative geomagnetic navigation in UAV swarm systems.
Motivated by this consideration, and inspired by physics-guided neural modeling, this study
proposes a real-time, adaptive, and robust aeromagnetic interference compensation framework under
strong interference conditions. The proposed method integrates physics-consistent linear modeling
with lightweight neural networks to achieve reliable single-sensor compensation, thereby providing a
sensing foundation that supports cooperative deployment across UAV swarm systems, as illustrated
in Figure 2. Inputs include magnetometer measurements, direction cosines, system signals (currents,
voltages), INS signals. Extended TL regression removes the linear errors, and the residual errors is
fed into a multi-branch CNN that extracts magnetic, electrical, and kinematic features. The fused
CNN prediction is combined with extended TL regression model to yield the final compensated
field. Evaluation metrics include the standard deviation (STD) of the residual magnetic field and the
improvement ratio (IR = σraw
σres ).
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.8]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
8 of 26
Figure 2. Architecture of the proposed PG-TLNet framework, illustrating physics-guided interference
decomposition and multi-branch residual learning for real-time aeromagnetic compensation.
3.1. PG-TLNet Compensation Model
In the PG-TLNet framework, the extended T–L regression model is constructed to compensate
for the linear errors corresponding to physically interpretable components (permanent, induced,
and eddy-current terms). By incorporating measurable signals (e.g., currents, voltages, positions,
velocities) into the induced and eddy-current terms, the remaining residuals can be isolated. To
ensure real-time applicability on embedded systems, the neural network is trained only on these
residuals, which reduces the function complexity that must be learned by the network and improves
training stability. A multi-branch 1D-CNN with embedded physical constraints is employed to learn
the nonlinear and time-varying characteristics of the residuals in parallel. The overall workflow of
the proposed PG-TLNet method, including both the training and real-time compensation procedures,
is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Because the inputs are multimodal time-series signals (magnetic measurements, T–L basis
functions, currents/voltages, IMU outputs, velocities/positions), preprocessing is first performed to
align all features with the magnetometer timeline. High-frequency signals are downsampled to match
the magnetometer frequency. By fitting coefficients, the first-order correction Binterf(t) is obtained,
and the residual can be expressed as:
r(t) = Bt(t) −Binterf(t)
(19)
Residual effects that cannot be linearized are predicted by the neural network. Using a sliding-
window approach, magnetometer data, attitude cosines, current/voltage signals, IMU data, and
position/velocity measurements are organized as inputs, with a window length of 40 samples
(corresponding to approximately 4 s at the 10 Hz sampling rate), which is sufficient to capture
transient disturbances during typical maneuvering conditions. To avoid redundant input dimensions,
maintain structural clarity, and leverage the temporal convolution capability of CNNs, features
are divided into three input branches based on physical attributes and correlations. Each branch
undergoes convolution and dimensionality reduction before feature fusion, ensuring both decoupling
and interpretability:
Branch A: Magnetic and T–L features. Includes raw magnetometer readings, direction cosines,
attitude angles, and the residuals predicted by the extended T–L model with system signal terms.
These low-dimensional, physically interpretable features enable the compensation network to capture
variations in magnetic disturbances with attitude.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.9]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
9 of 26
Branch B: Electrical system features. Comprises currents, voltages, RPM, and other features
strongly correlated with residuals, along with key lag terms. As these are high-dimensional and
redundant, embedding is applied for compression. This branch captures periodic and abrupt interfer-
ence patterns.
Branch C: Kinematic features. Includes selected current, voltage, velocity, and position features
with strong cross-correlation to residuals, reflecting dynamic eddy-current effects. This branch allows
the network to recognize coupled patterns during transient maneuvers.
Algorithm 1. Workflow of the algorithm
Data:
1.
Training dataset Btrain loader
2.
Test dataset Btest loader
Output: Compensated magnetic field ˆBe(t)
Training
3.
Get Binterf(t) by extended T–L regression on Btrain.
4.
Compute residual r(t) = Bt(t) −Binterf(t).
5.
Get features and branch assignment from Feature Selection section.
6.
For epoch = 1:n do
7.
Get the predict residual errors ˆr from the multi-branch 1D-CNN network;
8.
If ˆr ∈ϵ = LMSE + λsLsmooth + λpLphys
9.
|No: ˆBe(t) = Bt(t) −Binter f (t)
10.
|Yes: ˆBe(t) = Bt(t) −Binter f (t) −ˆr(t)
11.
| update the value Be(t) with ˆBe(t);
12.
| k = k + 1;
13.
End
Testing (Real-Time Compensation)
14.
Get Binterf(t) by extended T–L on Btest.
15.
Predict residual ˆr(t) with the trained multi-branch 1D-CNN.
16.
Condition check (gated correction)
17.
Real-time compensation
18.
Do reconstruction and get the Compensation value ˆBe(t)
Output: ˆBe(t)
ReLU activation is adopted in this work due to its computational efficiency and stable perfor-
mance in real-time embedded implementations. Each branch consists of an independent Conv1D,
BatchNorm, ReLU, Pooling module to extract local temporal patterns. Global pooling compresses
each branch output into a fixed-dimensional vector. Finally, the three branches are concatenated
and passed through a residual fully connected layer, with the output layer producing the predicted
residual ˆr(t). The final compensation result is expressed as:
Bcomp(t) = Bt(t) −Binterf(t) −ˆr(t)
(20)
After predicting the residual in each batch, a physics-informed loss function is used to compute
the training objective. The total loss is given by:
ϵ = LMSE + λsLsmooth + λpLphys
(21)
LMSE = 1
N
N
∑
t=1
(ˆr(t) −r(t))2
(22)
Lsmooth =
1
N −1
N
∑
t=2
(ˆr(t) −ˆr(t −1))2
(23)
Lphys = ∑
t ∑
k
( ∂ˆr(t)
∂Ik(t) −γ)
2
(24)
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.10]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
10 of 26
LMSE is the mean squared error between predicted and true residuals, ensuring stable con-
vergence. Lsmooth is the smoothness constraint that enforces the slow-varying nature of physical
magnetic fields and suppresses high-frequency jitter. Lphys is the physical consistency constraint to
reduce spurious correlations. If the network learns correct physical laws, the predicted residual’s
variation with current should conform to Ampère’s law, with γ representing the linear current-to-field
coupling coefficient. The weights are set as λs = 0.01 and λp = 0.001, adjustable depending on the
dataset. For training, the AdamW optimizer is employed, with weight pretraining used to shorten
convergence time. A LambdaLR scheduler progressively decreases the learning rate across iterations.
After each batch, gradients are cleared, the loss is backpropagated, and model weights are updated.
To ensure robustness in practical deployment, the framework retains the linear T–L compensation as
a fallback solution when the neural network output becomes unreliable.
It is important to emphasize that the neural network does not attempt to relearn the linear
interference components already captured by the extended T–L model. Instead, the extended T–L
regression first removes physically interpretable linear contributions, including permanent, induced,
and current-related linear effects. The CNN is then trained exclusively on the residual term, which
predominantly contains nonlinear, time-varying, and higher-order coupling components.
This residual-learning strategy prevents redundancy between the linear regression and the
neural network. From a functional decomposition perspective, the model separates interference into
a linear subspace (modeled explicitly by physics) and a nonlinear residual subspace (learned by the
CNN). The two components are therefore complementary rather than overlapping.
3.2. Feature Selection
The raw input features consist of a large number of variables that may be either strongly
cross-correlated or weakly related to magnetic interference. Without feature selection, redundant
inputs can cause the model to repeatedly learn overlapping information, leading to increased training
complexity, longer convergence time, and reduced interpretability. Moreover, irrelevant or noisy fea-
tures may induce spurious correlations in convolutional neural networks (CNNs), thereby degrading
compensation accuracy and robustness, particularly under strong interference conditions.
To enable lightweight deployment and reliable real-time performance on resource-constrained
aerial platforms, the compensation network should focus on learning physically meaningful interfer-
ence mechanisms rather than incidental noise. Accordingly, this study investigates feature selection
for aeromagnetic interference compensation under strong interference conditions and proposes a
systematic approach to identify an optimal and compact feature subset. The objective is to achieve
a balance between compensation accuracy and computational efficiency, ensuring that sufficient
information is retained to capture interference dynamics while minimizing redundancy and noise.
By constructing a compact and representative feature set, the risk of overfitting is reduced and the
generalization capability across heterogeneous operating conditions is enhanced.
Following the principle of high correlation with the target residual and low mutual redundancy
among features, a set of candidate core features is first identified through correlation analysis.
Pearson correlation is employed to quantify linear dependence, while Spearman correlation is used
to assess monotonic relationships that may not be strictly linear. The minimally interfered tail-stinger
magnetometer is used as an approximate reference value. the selected features and their physical
interpretations are summarized in Table 1. Features with scores ranked within the top 60% are
retained for the subsequent step.
In the next step, a tree-based model (LightGBM) was employed to evaluate the contribution of
each feature to interference prediction. A total of 50 independent runs were conducted, and feature
ranking was obtained using permutation importance. Features that consistently ranked in the bottom
10% were discarded. The results are shown in Figure 3, where the contribution of each feature is
proportional to the height of the corresponding histogram bar, and deeper colors indicate higher
feature importance. The red line illustrates the change in cumulative model error with respect to the
selected features. At the first eight features, the curve drops sharply, indicating that these features
contribute substantially to magnetic interference. Beyond this point, the curve flattens, showing
that the remaining features contribute relatively little. The LightGBM analysis indicated that several
features from the preliminary screening—including cur_ac_lo, cur_strb, ins_roll, cur_ac_hi, cur_flap,
cur_heat, and ins_vn—make significant contributions to compensation performance (highlighted in
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.11]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
11 of 26
red), representing the most informative subset. Features such as ins_vw, ins_yaw, ins_pitc, cur_tank,
vol_block, and vol_bat_2 (highlighted in black) also showed some predictive contribution.
Table 1. T Feature descriptions.
Feature
Description
Unit/Type
ins_vw
west velocity
m/s
ins_vu
vertical velocity
m/s
ins_vn
north velocity
m/s
ins_yaw
computed aircraft yaw
deg
ins_roll
computed aircraft roll
deg
ins_pitch
aircraft pitch
deg
ins_alt
altitude
m
ins_lat
latitude
m
vol_block
voltage: block
V
vol_bat_1
voltage: battery 1
V
vol_bat_2
voltage: battery 2
V
vol_cabt
voltage: cabinet
V
cur_ac_lo
current: air conditioner fan low
A
cur_ac_hi
current: air conditioner fan high
A
cur_flap
current: flap motor
A
cur_heat
current: INS heater
A
cur_srvo_o
current: INS outer servo
A
cur_srvo_i
current: INS internal servo
A
cur_strb
current: strobe lights
A
cur_acpwr
current: system output power
A
Figure 3. Feature contribution analysis and its influence on prediction error using the LightGBM
algorithm. The bar chart depicts the relative importance of individual features, while the over-
laid curve shows the corresponding absolute error as features are progressively incorporated in
descending order of importance. The figure illustrates the trade-off between feature significance and
model performance. Features highlighted in red indicate significant contributions, whereas features
highlighted in black correspond to minor contributions.
4. Results
4.1. Data Description
To characterize the variables in this study, a large airborne platform was used as the experimental
platform. Five scalar magnetometers were installed at different positions on the platform to simulate
sensors operating under different interference environments. Multiple flight segments were used to
emulate swarm magnetic sensing nodes. This configuration allows the sensors to experience different
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.12]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
12 of 26
local interference conditions while sharing the same flight trajectory and maneuvering state. Such an
experimental setup enables a controlled evaluation of the proposed compensation framework. Since
the objective of this work is to assess magnetic interference compensation performance, it is important
to eliminate additional uncertainties caused by different flight dynamics. Deploying all sensors on the
same aerial platform ensures identical maneuvering conditions and environmental exposure, thereby
allowing a fair comparison of compensation performance across sensing nodes. This design therefore
provides a controlled experimental environment to investigate node-level magnetic measurement
consistency, which is a key prerequisite for future multi-UAV geomagnetic sensing and cooperative
navigation systems. Among all sensors, Mag_1 is located relatively far from the major onboard
interference sources and therefore experiences the smallest platform-induced magnetic disturbance.
In this study, Mag_1 is used as an approximate reference measurement. In contrast, Mag_3 is located
inside the platform cabin and is close to dense electronic subsystems, where it experiences severe
magnetic interference. The interference amplitude can reach approximately 1000 nT. Therefore,
Mag_3 is selected as the primary sensor to evaluate the robustness of the proposed method under
strong interference conditions. In addition, the vector magnetometer Flux_1 is used to provide vector
magnetic field information for constructing the TL compensation model.
The spatial distribution of the magnetometers on the experimental platform is illustrated in
Figure 4. A consolidated summary of the onboard magnetometers, including sensor type, sampling
rate, and qualitative interference level, is provided in Table 2. The interference level is qualitatively
ranked according to the observed amplitude of platform-induced magnetic disturbances during
flight experiments, the stars represent the relative level of interference, with a higher number of stars
indicating stronger interference. In addition to magnetic measurements, the dataset also includes
multiple auxiliary signals describing the operating state of the platform, such as onboard current,
voltage, flight attitude, and kinematic variables. A detailed description of the dataset fields is
given in Table 3. All scalar magnetometers operate at a sampling frequency of 10 Hz (0.1 s time
interval), ensuring consistent temporal resolution across the sensing nodes. To guarantee proper
temporal alignment among heterogeneous signals, all sensor measurements are synchronized using
the onboard flight computer timestamp. Electrical signals, attitude measurements, and kinematic
data are aligned to the magnetometer timeline prior to model training. Signals with higher sampling
rates are downsampled, while lower-rate signals are interpolated to maintain temporal consistency
across all input channels.
 
Figure 4. Scalar magnetometers locations on the experimental platform.
Table 2. Summary of onboard magnetometers and their interference environments.
Sensors
Type
Sampling Rate
Interference Level
Mag_1
Scalar
10 Hz
☆
Mag_2
Scalar
10 Hz
☆☆☆
Mag_3
Scalar
10 Hz
☆☆☆☆
Mag_4
Scalar
10 Hz
☆☆
Mag_5
Scalar
10 Hz
☆
Flux_1
Vector
10 Hz
☆☆☆☆☆
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.13]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
13 of 26
Table 3. Description of the dataset.
Feature Name
Sampling Rate
Description
Magnetometers
10 Hz
Measurements from magnetometers
Current
10 Hz
Onboard current information
Voltage
10 Hz
Onboard voltage information
Attitude
10 Hz
Aircraft orientation angles: yaw, pitch, and roll
Flight Status
10 Hz
Kinematic characteristics of aircraft under
various events
Time stamp
10 Hz
Temporal markers for time-series prediction
It should be noted that the dataset adopted in this study spans a wide range of interference
sources and dynamic operating conditions. This therefore provides representative and conservative
engineering evidence for the potential applicability of the proposed approach across heterogeneous
aerial platforms, including UAV and UAV swarm systems. Prior to interference compensation,
all sensor data are temporally synchronized, and Z-score normalization is applied to mitigate the
influence of differing physical units and numerical scales on model training. All experiments are
conducted on a workstation equipped with the CPU (AMD Ryzen 7 7800X3D) is from Advanced Micro
Devices (AMD), Santa Clara, CA, USA, and the GPU (NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4060 Ti) is from NVIDIA
Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA. The proposed algorithm is implemented in Python 3.7 using the
PyTorch deep learning framework.
4.2. Results Under Strong Interference Conditions
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed PG-TLNet interference compensation method
under strong platform-induced magnetic interference, the flight trajectory dataset was divided into
training and testing subsets, as summarized in Table 4. Considering that Flt_3 and Flt_7 have
longer durations, traverse more complex geomagnetic environments, and involve more aggressive
maneuvering, these flights exhibit significantly stronger and more dynamic magnetic interference.
They were therefore selected as independent test sets to rigorously evaluate model performance
under severe interference conditions. The segment durations are summarized in Table 4. The
remaining flights (Flt_4, Flt_5, and Flt_6) were used exclusively for model training and parameter
optimization. This data partitioning strategy avoids any overlap between training and testing data,
ensuring objectivity and rigor in performance evaluation. The experiments primarily compare the
conventional Tolles–Lawson (T–L) model with the proposed hybrid PG-TLNet framework under
strong interference conditions.
Table 4. Summary of flight lines used for training and testing.
Flight Line
Duration
Description
Flt_3
16,000 s
Test set
Flt_4
7968 s
Train set
Flt_5
8017 s
Train set
Flt_6
9905 s
Train set
Flt_7
11,532 s
Test set
For each test flight, the corresponding compensation results are illustrated in Figure 5. In
the figure, the green curve denotes the reference ground truth measured by the low-interference
magnetometer Mag_1, the gray curve represents the raw uncompensated measurements from Mag_3,
the blue curve corresponds to the compensation result of the conventional Tolles–Lawson (T–L) model,
and the orange curve shows the output of the proposed PG-TLNet method. As shown in Figure 5a,c,
the PG-TLNet results closely follow the reference signal, exhibiting substantially reduced fluctuations
compared with both the raw measurements and the T–L compensated results. In contrast, the T–L
model retains noticeable residual oscillations, particularly during long-duration and dynamically
varying flight segments. The corresponding absolute error plots in Figure 5b,d further highlight
the performance differences among the methods. For Flt_3, PG-TLNet achieves an the standard
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.14]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
14 of 26
deviation (STD) of 26.64 nT, representing 85.2% reduction relative to the T–L model (179.99 nT).
For the more challenging Flt_7 flight, the STD is further reduced to 24.15 nT, corresponding to a
74.61% improvement over the T–L baseline (95.12 nT). In both test cases, the T–L model exhibits
pronounced fluctuations and residual error accumulation over time, which limits its suitability
for sustained aeromagnetic compensation under strong interference conditions. In contrast, the
proposed PG-TLNet framework maintains consistently low residual levels throughout the entire flight
duration, even when evaluated on test flights that are temporally separated from the training data,
demonstrating strong stability and generalization capability. Under high-maneuvering conditions,
occasional transient error peaks can still be observed in the PG-TLNet results. These peaks are
likely induced by rapid variations in the platform’s electromagnetic environment during aggressive
maneuvers. Nevertheless, their magnitudes remain tightly bounded and do not lead to cumulative
error growth, indicating that the proposed framework preserves robustness under strongly disturbed
and highly dynamic operating conditions, which are representative of onboard UAV magnetic sensing
and navigation scenarios.
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 5. Aeromagnetic compensation performance on the strongly interfered magnetometer Mag_3
using the proposed PG-TLNet framework compared with the conventional Tolles–Lawson (TL)
model. Results are shown for two representative test flight lines. (a) Compensated magnetic field
of Mag_3 for Flight 3 compared with raw measurements and the reference ground truth; (b) Corre-
sponding absolute error of Mag_3 for Flight 3; (c) Compensated magnetic field of Mag_3 for Flight 7;
(d) Corresponding absolute error of Mag_3 for Flight 7.
In this study, STD is used as a measure of data error. In addition, the Improvement Ratio (IR),
widely adopted by the National Research Council Canada [34], In this study, the standard deviation
(STD) of the magnetic error is adopted to quantify the fluctuation level of measurement errors. In
addition, the Improvement Ratio (IR), which has been widely used in aeromagnetic compensation
studies by the National Research Council of Canada (NRC), is employed as a key performance
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.15]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
15 of 26
indicator for evaluating magnetic interference compensation performance. A larger IR indicates more
effective suppression of magnetic interference. The IR is defined as
IR = σraw
σres
(25)
where σraw and σres denote the standard deviations of the uncompensated and compensated magnetic
errors, respectively.
The magnetic error at time index i is defined as
ei = Bpred,i −Bref,i
(26)
where Bpred,i represents the measured or compensated magnetic field, and Bref,i denotes the reference
magnetic field. The standard deviation of the magnetic error over a flight segment containing N
samples is computed as
σ =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(ei −e)2
(27)
where e is the mean value of the error sequence. Accordingly, the uncompensated error and residual
error are defined as eraw = Buncompensated −Bref, eres = Bcompensated −Bref, and their corresponding
standard deviations are denoted as σraw and σres, respectively. Both quantities are evaluated over
the same flight segment after time alignment to ensure a fair comparison. To further investigate the
robustness of the proposed PG-TLNet framework under varying maneuvering conditions, the two
test flights Flt_3 and Flt_7 were segmented according to their maneuvering states. Compensation
performance was evaluated separately for each maneuver segment to analyze the influence of flight
dynamics on residual magnetic interference. The corresponding prediction errors of TL model and
PG-TLNet model are summarized in Table 5.
Table 5. TL model and PG-TLNet model prediction errors for each test segment.
Line
σTL
σPGTL
IRTL
IRPGTL
Line
σTL
σPGTL
IRTL
IRPGTL
Flt_3
179.99
26.64
2.11
14.26
Flt_7
95.12
24.15
4.13
16.27
Flt_3.01
63.38
17.40
3.48
12.69
Flt_7.01
66.01
18.15
2.88
10.48
Flt_3.02
27.63
5.86
3.59
16.97
Flt_7.02
31.64
26.04
7.19
8.74
Flt_3.03
110.98
20.44
2.63
14.31
Flt_7.03
26.67
17.95
7.02
10.44
Flt_3.04
146.49
49.96
1.21
3.57
Flt_7.04
73.96
20.27
4.60
16.79
Flt_3.05
18.71
5.80
4.36
14.08
Flt_7.05
140.57
22.09
1.13
7.23
Flt_3.06
31.96
6.57
2.11
10.31
Flt_3.07
89.15
23.31
0.67
2.56
Flt_3.08
355.83
44.30
0.61
4.87
By correlating the segment information in Table 4 with the quantitative results in Table 5, it
is evident that the proposed PG-TLNet consistently outperforms the conventional Tolles–Lawson
(TL) model across all test segments. For Flt_3, the TL residual standard deviation varies widely
among segments, reaching up to 355.83 nT, whereas PG-TLNet substantially reduces the residual
variability across most segments, with many segments achieving residual STD values below 20 nT.
The corresponding improvement ratios IRPGTL are generally above 10, with particularly strong gains
observed in long-duration steady-flight segments. Segments with more complex motion exhibit
relatively lower IR values, indicating increased difficulty in compensating highly non-stationary
interference; nevertheless, the overall residual standard deviation is reduced from 179.99 nT to
26.64 nT, yielding an average IRPGTL of 14.26.
For Flt_7, which features overall higher maneuvering complexity, PG-TLNet demonstrates even
more pronounced performance gains. While the TL residuals remain significant, PG-TLNet consis-
tently constrains the compensated residual standard deviation to below 25 nT across all segments,
with most IRPGTL values typically ranging from about 7 to 17. The combined result shows a reduction
from 95.12 nT to 24.15 nT, corresponding to an IRPGTL of 16.27. These results confirm that PG-TLNet
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.16]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
16 of 26
provides robust and stable magnetic interference suppression across diverse flight conditions, main-
taining high compensation effectiveness even under complex and prolonged maneuvers.
This maneuver-wise evaluation complements the geospatial error analysis presented in Figure 6,
enabling a comprehensive assessment of model adaptability from both motion-state and spatial
perspectives under strong onboard interference conditions. Figure 6 shows the geospatial distribution
of mag3 residual errors predicted by PG-TLNet for Flt_3 and Flt_7. The results indicate that compen-
sation accuracy is primarily influenced by maneuvering complexity rather than altitude variation
alone. For smooth or moderately varying flight segments, residuals remain spatially uniform and
are generally confined within 25 nT. In segments involving dense turns and rapid heading changes,
localized error increases are observed, particularly in the top-view trajectories. Nevertheless, even
under these highly dynamic conditions, residuals remain bounded within 30 nT without exhibiting
cumulative growth along the flight path. This demonstrates that PG-TLNet maintains stable compen-
sation performance under rapidly varying interference conditions. Across all maneuvering regimes,
PG-TLNet consistently outperforms the conventional Tolles–Lawson model, producing smooth,
non-accumulative residual distributions. Combined with the STD and IR results in Tables 4 and 5,
these findings confirm that the proposed method achieves robust magnetic interference suppression
and provides a reliable magnetic sensing foundation for geomagnetic matching–based navigation.
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 6. Geospatial visualization of Mag3 residual errors predicted by the PG-TLNet model, together
with the corresponding maneuvering information: (a) Residual errors of Flt_3 (side view); (b) Residual
errors of Flt_7 (side view).
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.17]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
17 of 26
To evaluate the real-time capability of the proposed framework, inference was conducted on
two representative test flights, Flt3 (160,000 samples) and Flt7 (114,480 samples). The total processing
time for 274,480 samples was 25.72 s, corresponding to an average per-sample latency of approx-
imately 0.094 ms (94 µs). Even at sampling rates exceeding 100 Hz, PG-TLNet occupies less than
1% of the available computation time per sample. Although the current evaluation was conducted
in a workstation environment, the low computational complexity and sub-millisecond inference
latency suggest that the proposed framework is well-suited for real-time onboard deployment, with
substantial computational headroom remaining. An illustrative geomagnetic navigation example
based on the compensated magnetic measurements is provided in Appendix A.
Latencyper-sample =
25.72
274,480 = 9.37 × 10−5 s ≈94 µs
(28)
4.3. Aeromagnetic Compensation Performance Comparison
To further evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed PG-TLNet framework for aeromagnetic
interference compensation, its performance was compared with several representative methods,
including the data-driven 1D-CNN-TLNet method [26], the classical backpropagation neural network
(BPNN) method [29], and the interference model-guided neural network (IMGNN) method [28]. In
addition, the conventional Tolles–Lawson (TL) model was used as a baseline method. The standard
deviation (STD) of the uncompensated magnetic measurements (raw data) is also reported for
reference. Table 6 presents the absolute error of the magnetic measurements for two representative
test flights (Flt_3 and Flt_7) after applying different compensation algorithms. The gray curves
correspond to the raw magnetic measurements, while the colored curves represent the compensated
results obtained using different methods.
Table 6. Comparison of aeromagnetic compensation performance for different methods on the test
flights Flt_3 and Flt_7.
Model
STD_Flt3 (nT)
STD_Flt7 (nT)
Raw
379.77
393.02
TL
179.99
95.12
PG-TLNet
26.64
24.15
1DCNN-TLNet
27.28
28.29
BPNN
44.49
35.19
IMGNN
39.20
21.76
The comparison results presented in Table 6 and Figure 7 reveal several important obser-
vations regarding the performance of different aeromagnetic compensation methods. First, the
neural-network-based approaches demonstrate significantly better compensation capability than the
conventional TL model, indicating that deep learning techniques are effective in modeling complex
and nonlinear magnetic interference. In particular, methods based on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) show both strong compensation performance and stable results across different flight condi-
tions. Both the PG-TLNet and the 1D-CNN-TLNet methods are built upon CNN architectures, and
they achieve the lowest residual errors among all evaluated methods.
For the Flt_3 test flight, which involves more aggressive maneuvering and complex dynamic
conditions, the raw magnetic measurements exhibit severe fluctuations with an STD of 379.77 nT.
The TL model reduces the STD to 179.99 nT, but the residual error remains large due to its inability
to capture nonlinear and transient disturbances. The BPNN and IMGNN methods improve the
compensation performance to some extent, achieving STDs of 44.49 nT and 39.20 nT, respectively.
In contrast, the CNN-based approaches provide substantially better results. The 1D-CNN-TLNet
method reduces the STD to 27.28 nT, while the proposed PG-TLNet further decreases it to 26.64 nT.
For the Flt_7 test flight, which corresponds to relatively smoother flight conditions, all methods
achieve improved performance compared with Flt_3. The TL model reduces the STD from 393.02 nT
to 95.12 nT, while the BPNN method achieves 35.19 nT and the IMGNN method further improves
the result to 21.76 nT. The CNN-based approaches again demonstrate strong performance, with the
1D-CNN-TLNet and PG-TLNet methods achieving STDs of 28.29 nT and 24.15 nT, respectively.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.18]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
18 of 26
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
(d) 
 
 
(e) 
(f) 
Figure 7.
Aeromagnetic compensation performance comparison using different methods on
two representative test flights.
(a) Absolute error comparison between raw data, TL model,
and 1D-CNN-TLNet on Flt_3; (b) Absolute error comparison between raw data, TL model, and
1D-CNN-TLNet on Flt_7; (c) Absolute error comparison between raw data, TL model, and BPNN
on Flt_3; (d) Absolute error comparison between raw data, TL model, and BPNN on Flt_7; (e) Ab-
solute error comparison between raw data, TL model, and IMGNN on Flt_3; (f) Absolute error
comparison between raw data, TL model, and IMGNN on Flt_7. The gray curves represent the raw
magnetic measurements, while the colored curves correspond to the compensated results produced
by different algorithms.
Another notable observation is the stability of CNN-based compensation methods across
different flight conditions. The results of PG-TLNet and 1D-CNN-TLNet remain consistently low for
both Flt_3 and Flt_7, whereas the performance of the TL, BPNN, and IMGNN methods varies more
significantly between the two flight segments. This indicates that CNN-based models are more robust
in handling complex maneuver-induced magnetic interference. Overall, the proposed PG-TLNet
framework achieves consistently strong performance across both flight tests. By integrating the
physical interpretability of the TL model with a structured three-branch CNN architecture, PG-TLNet
effectively captures both linear interference components and complex nonlinear disturbances. This
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.19]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
19 of 26
hybrid design enables the model to achieve both high compensation accuracy and stable performance
under different flight conditions, demonstrating the advantage of combining physical modeling with
deep learning for aeromagnetic interference compensation.
4.4. Cross-Node Consistency Evaluation for Swarm Deployment
In UAV swarm systems, cooperative geomagnetic navigation requires each UAV node to provide
reliable and mutually consistent magnetic measurements. To evaluate the swarm-deployability of
PG-TLNet without introducing additional assumptions about inter-vehicle communication, we per-
form a cross-node consistency analysis by treating each scalar magnetometer channel as an indepen-
dent sensing node. The dataset contains five optically pumped scalar magnetometers (Mag_1–Mag_5)
installed at different platform locations, covering regions with significantly different interference
levels. Mag_1 is mounted at a location relatively far from major onboard interference sources and
is minimally affected by platform-induced disturbances, and is therefore used as an approximate
reference measurement. In contrast, Mag_2, Mag_3, Mag_4, and Mag_5 are installed at near-body
locations with varying degrees of interference. For this cross-node evaluation, we focus on the
Flt_7 flight line. For each sensing node k ∈{ Mag_2,Mag_3, Mag_4, Mag_5}, we apply the same
compensation pipeline and model configuration as used in the main experiments. The compensated
output is compared against Mag_1 to quantify both node-to-reference accuracy and node-to-node
consistency. Figure 8 visualizes the temporal stability and cross-node consistency of the compensated
outputs, illustrates the time-series absolute residual errors of PG-TLNet for Mag_2, Mag_3, Mag_4,
and Mag_5 along the Flt_7 line. Despite the presence of sharp transient disturbances and highly
dynamic operating segments, the compensated outputs of all nodes remain stable and bounded.
 
Figure 8. Time-series absolute residual errors of PG-TLNet for Mag_2, Mag_3, Mag_4, and Mag_5 on
the Flt_7 test line.
Extending the evaluation to Mag_2, Mag_4, and Mag_5, the results summarized in Table 7 show
that PG-TLNet consistently reduces the node-to-reference residuals across all sensing nodes, the wide
spread of σraw confirms the heterogeneous interference conditions across sensing nodes. For strongly
interfered sensors, the residual error standard deviations are concentrated in the 20–30 nT range,
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.20]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
20 of 26
while for weakly interfered sensors they are below 10 nT. Compared with the raw measurements, the
dispersion among node outputs is significantly reduced, indicating enhanced cross-node consistency.
For the worst-case sensor Mag_3, the main results already demonstrate that PG-TLNet substantially
improves compensation performance under severe interference conditions. In addition, the pairwise
differences among compensated node outputs exhibit markedly lower dispersion than those obtained
using the uncompensated data, further confirming improved cross-node measurement consistency.
Table 7. Cross-node aeromagnetic compensation performance for swarm-oriented evaluation.
Node
σraw
σPGTL
IRPGTL
Line
Mag_3
393.02
24.15
16.27
Flt_7
Mag_2
385.40
23.61
17.426
Flt_7
Mag_4
211.50
21.82
9.695
Flt_7
Mag_5
99.26
5.14
19.347
Flt_7
Overall, these results demonstrate that PG-TLNet not only provides robust single-node interfer-
ence suppression, but also effectively homogenizes magnetic measurement quality across heteroge-
neous sensing nodes. By mitigating large node-to-node discrepancies induced by platform-dependent
interference, the proposed framework establishes a reliable and consistent magnetic sensing founda-
tion for cooperative geomagnetic navigation and localization in UAV swarm systems, particularly
under GNSS-denied conditions.
When transferring the model to another UAV platform, the TL coefficients can be recalibrated
using a short calibration flight, while the CNN parameters can be fine-tuned using a small amount of
platform-specific data. Because the CNN primarily learns generic nonlinear interference patterns
rather than platform-specific linear components, the required retraining effort is significantly reduced.
In addition, the multi-branch feature structure of PG-TLNet separates magnetic, electrical, and
kinematic information, which further improves the adaptability of the model to heterogeneous
UAV platforms with different electrical architectures and sensor layouts. Therefore, the proposed
framework provides a practical and scalable solution for aeromagnetic interference compensation in
heterogeneous UAV swarm systems.
4.5. Ablation Study
4.5.1. Feature-Source Ablation
To further analyze the influence of different auxiliary feature sources, a feature-source ablation
study was conducted using a two-branch CNN architecture. In all configurations, the first branch
processes magnetic sensor data, while the second branch incorporates either electrical features or
maneuver-related features, enabling a clear assessment of their individual contributions.
The results using only electrical features (cur_flap, cur_heat, cur_ac_hi, cur_ac_lo, cur_strb,
cur_tank, vol_bat_2, vol_block) are shown in Figure 9a,b. For Flt_3, the residual errors remain
relatively large and exhibit noticeable fluctuations. This degradation is mainly attributed to the more
aggressive maneuvering in Flt_3, where rapid attitude changes introduce interference components
that cannot be sufficiently captured by electrical signals alone. In contrast, Flt_7 shows improved
performance under the same configuration, benefiting from its relatively smoother and more stable
flight profile. These observations indicate that compensation based solely on electrical features is
sensitive to flight dynamics and lacks robustness under high-maneuver conditions. Figure 9c,d
present the results obtained using only maneuver-related features (ins_roll, ins_vw, ins_yaw, ins_vn,
and ins_pitch). In this case, the residual error curves are noticeably smoother across both test flights,
indicating stable compensation behavior. However, the overall error magnitude remains higher
than that achieved with electrical features in steady conditions. This suggests that while maneuver
features effectively model orientation- and motion-induced interference, they cannot fully account
for time-varying electromagnetic disturbances driven by onboard electrical systems.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.21]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
21 of 26
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 9. Feature-source ablation results on the strongly interfered magnetometer Mag_3 using a
two-branch CNN architecture. (a) Absolute error of Flt_3 using only electrical features; (b) Absolute
error of Flt_7 using only electrical features; (c) Absolute error of Flt_3 using only maneuver-related fea-
tures; (d) Absolute error of Flt_7 using only maneuver-related features. The results highlight the com-
plementary roles of electrical and maneuver features in modeling different interference mechanisms.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that electrical and maneuver features capture dis-
tinct and complementary interference mechanisms. Electrical features are effective in modeling
current-induced disturbances under relatively stable motion, whereas maneuver features provide ro-
bustness against attitude-related interference but lack sensitivity to electrical load variations. Relying
on either feature source alone therefore leads to suboptimal compensation performance. This analysis
further justifies the design choice of jointly incorporating both electrical and maneuver information in
the proposed PG-TLNet framework, enabling more accurate and robust aeromagnetic compensation
under strong interference and highly dynamic flight conditions.
4.5.2. Network Depth Ablation
To investigate the influence of network depth on compensation performance, a network depth
ablation study was conducted using the proposed PG-TLNet framework. Five configurations with
different numbers of convolutional layers (2, 3, 5, 7, and 8 layers) were evaluated while keeping the
input features and training strategy unchanged. Figures 10 and 11 present the absolute error results
for Flt_3 and Flt_7, respectively.
As shown in Figure 10, increasing the network depth from 2 to 5 layers leads to a clear reduction
in residual dispersion for the highly maneuvering Flt_3 flight. Shallow networks (34.14 nT at 2 layers
and 28.17 nT at 3 layers) exhibit larger fluctuations and occasional error peaks, indicating insufficient
representational capacity to model complex interference dynamics. In contrast, networks with
5 layers achieve substantially lower and more stable error distributions. Further increasing the depth
to 7 or 8 layers yields only marginal improvements in STD (26.84 nT at 7 layers and 26.64 nT at
8 layers), suggesting diminishing returns.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.22]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
22 of 26
 
Figure 10. Network depth ablation results on Test Line Flt_3 using the proposed PG-TLNet framework.
Absolute error distributions are shown for different network depths (2, 3, 5, 7, and 8 layers).
 
Figure 11. Network depth ablation results on Test Line Flt_7 using the proposed PG-TLNet framework.
Absolute error distributions are shown for different network depths (2, 3, 5, 7, and 8 layers).
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.23]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
23 of 26
A similar trend is observed in Figure 11 for the relatively smoother Flt_7 flight. While deeper
networks consistently reduce residual errors compared with shallow ones, the STD stabilizes once the
depth reaches five layers. Beyond this point, additional layers do not provide noticeable performance
gains, despite increased model complexity. Overall, these results indicate that a five-layer architecture
(24.15 nT) is sufficient to capture the dominant nonlinear interference characteristics under both dy-
namic and steady flight conditions. Considering the rapidly increasing computational cost associated
with deeper networks, the PG-TLNet adopts a three-branch, five-layer CNN as a balanced design
that achieves robust compensation performance while remaining suitable for real-time onboard
UAV applications.
5. Conclusions
This study proposes PG-TLNet, a physics-guided aeromagnetic interference compensation
framework designed for high-precision magnetic sensing under strong onboard interference con-
ditions. By tightly integrating an extended Tolles–Lawson (T–L) linear regression model with a
lightweight multi-branch convolutional neural network, the proposed approach balances physi-
cal interpretability with nonlinear modeling capability. Extensive flight experiments using multi-
ple scalar magnetometers demonstrate that PG-TLNet consistently outperforms the conventional
Tolles–Lawson (T–L) model and neural-network-based compensation methods under highly dynamic
flight conditions. The proposed method reduces residual magnetic interference from hundreds of
nanotesla to the 20–30 nT level, even under interference amplitudes approaching 1000 nT. In addition,
the framework improves measurement consistency across sensing nodes, which is beneficial for
multi-sensor magnetic measurement scenarios. The results further show that the proposed framework
operates in real time, with an average inference latency of approximately 94 µs per sample. This
computational efficiency makes the method suitable for practical onboard implementation in aerial
platforms operating in complex electromagnetic environments.
Overall, the proposed method provides an effective solution for suppressing platform-generated
magnetic interference and establishing a stable magnetic sensing foundation for geomagnetic-field-based
navigation and related applications in GNSS-denied environments.
The proposed framework is platform-agnostic and readily deployable across heterogeneous
UAV nodes. The achieved compensation accuracy, robustness, and real-time capability indicate
that PG-TLNet can effectively support geomagnetic navigation for UAV platforms operating in
satellite-denied environments. By ensuring reliable and consistent magnetic measurements at the
individual node level, PG-TLNet improves measurement homogeneity across sensing nodes and
establishes a critical sensing foundation for cooperative detection and localization in UAV swarm
systems. Despite the encouraging results, several limitations should be acknowledged. First, under
extreme electrical fault conditions, such as sudden high-current surges or abnormal electromag-
netic coupling events, the linear–nonlinear hybrid structure may experience temporary performance
degradation due to out-of-distribution signals. Second, in dense swarm operations, potential electro-
magnetic coupling among closely spaced UAVs may introduce additional interference components
that are not explicitly modeled in the present framework. Future work will investigate adaptive
domain-shift detection mechanisms and cross-platform transfer strategies to enhance robustness
across UAV platforms with radically different electrical architectures. Furthermore, cooperative
swarm-level compensation strategies incorporating inter-node communication will be explored.
Author Contributions: Methodology, S.W., L.M., Y.W., D.L. and J.L.; Software, S.W., Y.W. and D.L.;
Validation, S.W. and Y.W.; Formal analysis, S.W. and J.L.; Investigation, S.W.; Resources, L.M., Y.W.
and J.L.; Data curation, S.W.; Writing—original draft, S.W.; Writing—review and editing, L.M., Y.W.,
D.L. and J.L.; Supervision, L.M. and J.L.; Project administration, J.L. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, grant
number 52488101 and Fundamental and Interdisciplinary Disciplines Breakthrough Plan of the
Ministry of Education of China, grant number JYB2025XDXM209.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding authors, the data are not publicly available due to privacy restrictions.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.24]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
24 of 26
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Appendix A
To illustrate the practical impact of magnetic interference compensation on navigation perfor-
mance, an additional geomagnetic matching experiment is presented. The compensated magnetic
measurements obtained using PG-TLNet are used as input to a geomagnetic matching algorithm
to estimate the platform trajectory. The navigation results are compared with those obtained using
uncompensated measurements. It should be noted that the purpose of this appendix is to provide an
illustrative example of system-level improvement rather than a full navigation study.
Figure A1. Illustration of geomagnetic navigation trajectories using uncompensated magnetic mea-
surements and PG-TLNet compensated measurements. The reference trajectory is obtained from GPS.
The geomagnetic matching experiment was conducted using a reference geomagnetic anomaly
map with a spatial resolution of 200 m × 200 m. The navigation solution was obtained using pure geo-
magnetic matching, without relying on any auxiliary sensors such as GNSS or inertial measurements.
As shown in Figure A1, relatively large positioning errors appear at the beginning of the
matching process. This phenomenon is expected because the algorithm requires an initial convergence
phase to establish correlation between the measured magnetic sequence and the reference map. As
the matching window accumulates more observations, the trajectory estimate gradually stabilizes
and converges toward the true path.
After the convergence stage, the positioning error is generally maintained within 200 m, which
is consistent with the spatial resolution of the geomagnetic reference map. It should be noted that the
achievable geomagnetic matching accuracy is fundamentally constrained by both the resolution of
the reference magnetic map and the local spatial variability of geomagnetic anomalies. Therefore, the
obtained navigation accuracy demonstrates that the compensated magnetic measurements produced
by PG-TLNet provide sufficient fidelity for practical geomagnetic matching applications.
References
1.
Song, F.; Zeng, Q.; Zhu, X.; Zhang, R.; Ye, X.; Zhou, H. Cooperative navigation framework for UAV formations using LSTM and
dynamic model fusion. Drones 2026, 10, 28. [CrossRef]
2.
Xu, H.; Hu, Y.; Gao, C.; Zhu, Z.; Zhao, Y.; Li, Y.; Yin, Q. Geonav: Empowering mllms with explicit geospatial reasoning abilities
for language-goal aerial navigation. arXiv 2025, arXiv:2504.09587.
3.
Lyu, Z.; Gao, Y.; Chen, J.; Du, H.; Xu, J.; Huang, K.; Kim, D.I. Empowering intelligent low-altitude economy with large AI model
deployment. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 2025, 33, 64–72. [CrossRef]
4.
Ge, J.; Xu, W.; Hu, X.; Wu, T.; Feng, K.; Zhang, Y.; Dong, H.; Yu, H.; Zhu, J.; Liu, Z. Intelligent suppression of non-maneuvering
magnetic interference of aeromagnetic UAV. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2023, 72, 6006412. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.25]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
25 of 26
5.
Luo, X.; Du, X.; Yue, S.; Lv, Y.; Zhang, L.; He, X.; Wu, W.; Mao, J. DTVIRM-Swarm: A distributed and tightly integrated
visual–inertial–UWB–magnetic system for anchor-free swarm cooperative localization. Drones 2026, 10, 49. [CrossRef]
6.
Freake, M.J.; Muheim, R.; Phillips, J.B. Magnetic maps in animals: A theory comes of age? Q. Rev. Biol. 2006, 81, 327–347.
[CrossRef]
7.
Guo, C.; Cai, H.; van der Heijden, G. Feature extraction and geomagnetic matching. J. Navig. 2013, 66, 799–811. [CrossRef]
8.
Wang, T.; Han, L.; Kong, Q.; Li, Z.; Li, C.; Han, J.; Bai, Q.; Chen, Y. An improved particle filter indoor fusion positioning approach
based on Wi-Fi/PDR/geomagnetic field. Def. Technol. 2024, 32, 443–458. [CrossRef]
9.
Yin, T.T.; Jia, F.X.; Wang, X.-M. Moving horizon-based wavelet denoising method of dual-observed geomagnetic signal for
nonlinear high-spin projectile roll positioning. Def. Technol. 2020, 16, 417–424. [CrossRef]
10.
Ma, B.; Huang, Z.-X.; Guan, Z.-W.; Jia, X.; Zu, X.-D.; Xiao, Q.-Q. Investigating the effects of magnetic fields on the penetration
ability of a shaped charge jet at different standoffs. Def. Technol. 2021, 17, 1722–1730. [CrossRef]
11.
Hood, P.J. History of aeromagnetic surveying in Canada. Lead. Edge 2007, 26, 1384–1392. [CrossRef]
12.
Lee, T.N.; Canciani, A.J. Aerial simultaneous localization and mapping using Earth’s magnetic anomaly field. In Proceedings of
the 2019 International Technical Meeting of the Institute of Navigation, Reston, VA, USA, 28–31 January 2019; pp. 471–485.
13.
Huang, C.; Hendeby, G.; Skog, I. A tightly integrated magnetic-field-aided inertial navigation system. In Proceedings of the 25th
International Conference on Information Fusion, Linköping, Sweden, 4–7 July 2022; pp. 1–8.
14.
Canciani, A.; Raquet, J.F. Airborne magnetic anomaly navigation. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 2017, 53, 67–80. [CrossRef]
15.
Gnadt, A. Machine learning-enhanced magnetic calibration for airborne magnetic anomaly navigation. In Proceedings of the
AIAA Science and Technology Forum, San Diego, CA, USA, 3–7 January 2022.
16.
Nerrise, F.; Sosanya, A.S.; Neary, P. Physics-informed calibration of aeromagnetic compensation in magnetic navigation systems
using liquid time-constant networks. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2401.09631.
17.
Chen, B.; Huang, L.; Zhang, K.; Hu, J.; Zhu, W. Magnetic interference analysis and compensation method of airborne electronic
equipment in an unmanned aerial vehicle. Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 7455. [CrossRef]
18.
Ge, L.; Han, Q.; Qiao, Z.; Meng, Z. Innovative aeromagnetic compensation techniques for in-cabin magnetometers amidst complex
onboard electronics interference. IEEE Sens. J. 2024, 24, 32801–32812. [CrossRef]
19.
Luo, H.; Du, Q.; Hu, J.; Shi, S.; Yang, C.; Zhang, Q.; Pan, M. A novel Obe magnetic interference compensation method based on
Vmd-Ica for marine exploration. IEEE Sens. J. 2024, 24, 39302–39314. [CrossRef]
20.
Canciani, A.J. Magnetic navigation on an F-16 aircraft using online calibration. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 2022, 58, 420–434.
[CrossRef]
21.
Siebler, B.; Sand, S.; Hanebeck, U.D. Localization with magnetic field distortions and simultaneous magnetometer calibration.
IEEE Sens. J. 2021, 21, 3388–3397. [CrossRef]
22.
Xu, X.; Huang, L.; Liu, X.; Fang, G. DeepMAD: Deep learning for magnetic anomaly detection and denoising. IEEE Access 2020,
8, 121257–121266. [CrossRef]
23.
Moradi, M.; Zhai, Z.-M.; Nielsen, A.; Lai, Y.-C. Random forests for detecting weak signals and extracting physical information:
A case study of magnetic navigation. APL Mach. Learn. 2024, 2, 016118. [CrossRef]
24.
Williams, P.M. Aeromagnetic compensation using neural networks. Neural Comput. Appl. 1993, 1, 207–214. [CrossRef]
25.
Hezel, M.C. Improving Aeromagnetic Calibration Using Artificial Neural Networks. Master’s Thesis, Air Force Institute of
Technology, Wright–Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, OH, USA, 2020.
26.
Zhang, D.; Liu, X.; Qu, X.; Zhu, W.; Huang, L.; Fang, G. Analysis of aeromagnetic swing noise and corresponding compensation
method. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 2021, 60, 2001910. [CrossRef]
27.
Ma, M.; Cheng, D.F.; Chalup, S.; Zhou, Z.J. Uncertainty estimation in the neural model for aeromagnetic compensation. IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 2018, 15, 1942–1946. [CrossRef]
28.
Xu, Y.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, Q.; Liu, X.; Huang, B.; Pan, M.; Hu, J.; Chen, D.; Ying, T.; Qiu, X. Interference model-guided neural network
for aeromagnetic compensation. IEEE Sens. J. 2024, 24, 12266–12275. [CrossRef]
29.
Jiao, J.; Yu, P.; Zhao, X.; Bi, F. Real-time aeromagnetic compensation with compressed and accelerated neural networks. IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 2022, 19, 8025905. [CrossRef]
30.
Kliment, T.; Lipovský, P.; Draganová, K.; Moucha, V. Comparison of speed and accuracy of chosen magnetometer calibration
algorithms in the presence of external interference. In Proceedings of the New Trends in Signal Processing Conference; IEEE: Piscataway,
NJ, USA, 2018; pp. 1–5.
31.
Gnadt, A.R.; Wollaber, A.B.; Nielsen, A.P. Derivation and extensions of the Tolles–Lawson model for aeromagnetic compensation.
arXiv 2022, arXiv:2212.09899.
32.
Tolles, W.E. Magnetic Field Compensation System. U.S. Patent US2706801A, 19 April 1955.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
[p.26]
Drones 2026, 10, 252
26 of 26
33.
Tuck, L.E.; Samson, C.; Polowick, C.; Laliberté, J.; Cunningham, M. Magnetic interference mapping of four types of unmanned
aircraft systems intended for aeromagnetic surveying. Geosci. Instrum. Methods Data Syst. 2021, 10, 101–112. [CrossRef]
34.
Tuck, L. Characterization and Compensation of Magnetic Interference Resulting from Unmanned Aircraft Systems. Master’s
Thesis, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2019.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/drones10040252
=== END ===
