warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1295.pdf
sha256: 4FCB42A96215F5EE071FA7AA72BCB9398ED947ED5FC1B0375DD69F1F856A5D19
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 18
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Digital Twin Approach for Drift-Free UAV
Localization in GPS-Denied Environments
Thomas Matiki, S.M.ASCE1; Yasutaka Narazaki, M.ASCE2;
Girish Chowdhary3; and Billie F. Spencer Jr., Dist.M.ASCE4
Abstract: Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) hold promise for automating civil infrastructure inspections, but reliable pose estimation is
crucial for autonomous navigation in GPS-denied environments. While simultaneous localization and mapping estimates UAV poses, drift
often occurs and is typically corrected through loop closures. However, relying on loop closures limits UAV maneuverability to paths that
enable loop formation. To overcome this, recent methods leverage digital twins by combining highly accurate three-dimensional (3D)
models of the physical environment with identification of distinctive landmarks to enable drift-free localization. In earlier work, the authors
proposed using a graphics-based digital twin (GBDT) for drift-free localization through landmark identification, but this approach fails in
landmark-sparse environments. This paper eliminates landmark detection by matching visual patterns between the physical structure and its
digital twin. UAV images are compared with views from virtual cameras positioned in the digital model. After identifying the virtual camera
that best aligns with the UAV’s viewpoint, the iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm is used to estimate their relative pose. To enhance
accuracy, the method GBDTpose2 uses trustworthy regions, areas that are geometrically and visually similar in both the physical structure
and digital twin. These regions guide the selection of 3D point cloud pairs for ICP. By computing the UAV pose relative to a virtual camera
with a known pose, the approach naturally ensures drift-free localization. GBDTpose2 is validated in a laboratory environment using ROS
(Robot Operating System) for real-time localization, achieving centimeter-level accuracy without drift, highlighting its potential for
autonomous UAV navigation in GPS-denied environments. DOI: 10.1061/JCCEE5.CPENG-7010. © 2025 American Society of Civil
Engineers.
Author keywords: Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs); Localization; Pose estimation; Digital twin; Infrastructure inspection; Computer
vision.
Introduction
Regular and periodic inspection of critical civil infrastructure, such
as bridges, is crucial to ensure their safety and functionality, which
is essential for seamless economic operations. To this end, visual
inspection by trained inspectors is often required once every
24 months for highway bridges (FHWA 2004), or at least every
12 months for railroad bridges (FRA 2010) in the USA, to observe
symptoms of structural distress and plan for more detailed non-
destructive tests (Agdas et al. 2016). However, traditional visual
inspections are slow, are expensive, pose risks to the inspectors,
and are subjective (Malekloo et al. 2022; Dorafshan and Maguire
2018). To resolve these issues, many researchers have sought to
employ unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to automate the task of
civil infrastructure inspection (e.g., Khaloo et al. 2017; Hallermann
and Morgenthal 2014; Ali et al. 2021). While progress has been
made toward the use of UAVs for inspections, manual control of
UAVs for navigation is tedious and prone to collision with objects
(Agnisarman et al. 2019). For autonomous UAV navigation to be
achieved, a mission planner, a localization system, and flight con-
troller are required (Drew et al. 2017; Kwak and Sung 2018). The
mission planner generates the flight plan and the next waypoint
(wherein the UAV would perform a predefined action such as taking
a photo), and the localization system provides the current pose of the
UAV, which the flight controller uses together with the waypoints
to automatically navigate the UAV. Unfortunately, GPS is not al-
ways available around critical regions of civil infrastructure (for
example, below a bridge deck), which poses significant localiza-
tion challenges and limits autonomous UAV navigation and in-
spection (Vanegas et al. 2019; Szrek et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022).
Even when available, GPS accuracy can vary up to several meters
for commercial drones, which limits the ability of the drone to
autonomously follow a preplanned path for inspection (Duncan
et al. 2013). Therefore, development of techniques for localization
in GPS-denied environments is necessary, to achieve the automa-
tion of regular and periodic inspection of critical civil infrastruc-
ture with UAVs.
To autonomously navigate to the next waypoint and perform
a task (similar to visual inspections), a UAV needs to know where
it currently is. Numerous researchers have developed strategies
for localization in GPS-denied environments, which is still a chal-
lenging problem (Zhang and Hsu 2019; Lin and He 2021). One of
the most popular approaches is simultaneous localization and map-
ping (SLAM), as found in these references (Davison et al. 2007;
1Ph.D. Student, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Univ. of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801. Email: tmatiki2@illinois
.edu
2Assistant Professor, Zhejiang University–University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Institute, Zhejiang Univ., Haining 314400, China
(corresponding author). ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1680-5079.
Email: narazaki@intl.zju.edu.cn
3Associate Professor, Coordinated Science Laboratory, Univ. of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801. Email: girishc@illinois.edu
4Professor, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Univ. of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801. Email: bfs@illinois.edu
Note. This manuscript was submitted on March 18, 2025; approved on
June 24, 2025; published online on September 29, 2025. Discussion period
open until February 28, 2026; separate discussions must be submitted for
individual papers. This paper is part of the Journal of Computing in Civil
Engineering, © ASCE, ISSN 0887-3801.
© ASCE
04025123-1
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.2]
Newcombe et al. 2011; Mur-Artal et al. 2015; Chowdhary et al.
2013; Klein and Murray 2007; Engel et al. 2017; Bloesch et al. 2015;
Campos et al. 2021; Doherty et al. 2019). SLAM seeks to localize a
robot using computer vision to detect and track landmarks in the
environment; however, SLAM requires loop closure (i.e., returning
to a previously visited location) to minimize the accumulation of
pose errors, implicitly constraining UAV trajectories to the ones that
can close enough loops. Furthermore, even when loop closures are
achieved, errors in the original position can corrupt the estimated
poses (Guclu and Burak 2017; Tsintotas et al. 2022; Schubert et al.
2023). While artificial landmarks such as AprilTags (John and
Edwin 2016) can be used to enhance recognition robustness, plac-
ing these tags at various locations on the structure can be challeng-
ing. Therefore, to enable autonomous navigation, techniques need
to be developed that provide drift-free pose estimates.
Several studies have proposed methods to achieve drift-free pose
estimates for mobile robots. For example, Schmitt et al. (1999) pro-
posed using a virtual camera (VC) to project a set of lines and tex-
tures in a virtual environment to the physical world to localize a
robot. To ensure viewpoint overlap between the VC and the robot
for accurate localization results, they used the prior pose of the robot
to reconfigure the VC. To maximize viewpoint overlap, Lin and He
(2021) used a 360° virtual camera and projected predefined lines
from a virtual space to the real world for localization. However, es-
timation of the robot’s pose using a set of lines can result in ambi-
guities (Lin and He 2021), and correspondence of edges (or lines) in
the physical world can also suffer misrepresentations and errors
(Rosten and Drummond 2005; Zhou et al. 2021; Yue et al. 2023; Ulas
and Hakan 2013). Although various techniques for feature matching
have been developed (e.g., Lowe 2004; Sarlin et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2021; Lindenberger et al. 2023) feature matching errors can still occur
in environments with inadequate distinctive features (Ma et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2021a; Yao et al. 2021; Arshad and Kim 2023; Arshad
and Park 2024). Moreover, in very large and complex environments, a
single VC has a limited field-of-view, which may restrict comprehen-
sive navigation. Real-time reconfiguration of the VC requires real-time
communication between the VCs and a robot (or UAV), which is not
straightforward. In another study, Conte and Doherty (2009) used geo-
tagged images for drift-free UAV localization. Because the geotagged
images already have reference position information, the authors used
feature matching between geotagged images and images observed
by an onboard camera on a UAV to estimate the UAV’s relative pose.
However, the need for preparing enough geotagged images can limit
the applicability of the method (especially in GPS-denied environ-
ments). To overcome these challenges, high-fidelity digital twins can
be leveraged to accurately represent and match features from the physi-
cal environment. By enabling communication between the digital and
physical twins through an edge device mounted on the UAV, more
descriptive features can be computed and retrieved in real time using
distributed processing. Furthermore, by strategically placing multiple
virtual cameras within the digital twin, the system can continuously
provide accurate, drift-free pose estimates, making it well-suited for
reliable UAV navigation in GPS-denied environments.
This paper presents a digital twin approach, termed herein as
GBDTpose2 for drift-free UAV localization. GBDTpose2 extends
the authors’ previous work termed GBDTpose (Matiki et al. 2024)
wherein a graphics-based digital twin (GBDT) of a structure was
used to enable UAV localization in GPS-denied environments. The
GBDT as presented in Wang et al. (2022) is a computer graphics
model (CGM) containing structural information (e.g., finite-element
model) and is intended to be a living photorealistic representation of
the target structure. The CGM is designed to be continuously up-
dated using UAV survey data to reflect structural damage or geo-
metric changes, while corresponding adjustments are made to the
finite-element model. Real-time, bidirectional communication be-
tween the GBDT and the physical structure, facilitated by an edge
device mounted on the UAV, enables seamless updates to maintain
the accuracy and relevance of the GBDT. The GBDTpose method
localized UAVs by detecting distinctive patterns on both the physi-
cal structure and its digital twin, referred to as GBDTtags. These
tags, similar to AprilTags (John and Edwin 2016), allow the UAV’s
pose to be estimated within the coordinate frame of the digital
twin. Although GBDTpose demonstrated strong performance during
field tests on a bridge, its effectiveness decreased in environments
with sparse GBDTtags, which is often the case in civil structures
with repetitive patterns. In addition, using a neural network for tag
detection can limit real-time pose estimation on edge devices, as
UAV flight controllers typically require pose updates at a rate of
at least 2 Hz. To address these issues, GBDTpose2 processes the
image stream from the target (physical) structure and that from the
GBDT, without the intermediate step of developing GBDTtags. The
image rendering in the GBDT environment runs in real time on a
base-station computer. Using the Robot Operating System (ROS)
messaging protocol (ROS 2018a), the VC poses and captured im-
ages are transmitted in real time to an edge device mounted on the
UAV. On the edge device, GBDTpose2 uses the histogram of ori-
ented gradient (HOG) to select the VC sustaining sufficient view-
point overlap with the UAV’s camera. After identifying the virtual
camera that best aligns with the UAV’s viewpoint, the iterative clos-
est point (ICP) algorithm is used to estimate their relative pose. To
enhance accuracy, GBDTpose2 uses trustworthy regions, which are
areas that are geometrically and visually similar in both the physical
structure and digital twin. These regions guide the selection of three-
dimensional (3D) point cloud (PC) pairs for ICP. The proposed ap-
proach is validated in laboratory tests using a truss bridge as the
physical twin, a UAV with mounted Jetson Nano (as the edge
device), and an Intel RealSense D435 camera. The results demon-
strate that localization accuracy within the centimeter to subcentim-
eter range is achieved for the entire duration of the navigation.
Additionally, GBDTpose2 can run at 7 Hz on the Jetson Nano,
indicating its potential for autonomous UAV navigation in GPS-
denied environments.
Problem Formulation
This research aims to localize a UAV performing visual inspection
in a GPS-denied environment (as shown in Fig. 1). The approach
relies on matching textural and geometric patterns captured by
the UAV’s onboard camera and VCs. The UAV’s onboard camera
(denoted as CA in Fig. 1) streams RGB-D (colored and depth) im-
ages to an edge device mounted on the UAV. Meanwhile, the VCs,
which are depth cameras hosted in a real-time simulator (e.g.,
Gazebo 2014a), run on a base-station computer. A single VC, de-
noted by C, is considered in Fig. 1. Furthermore, the coordinate sys-
tem of the VC is denoted by xyz, and its pose with respect to the
fixed frame G (XYZ) is denoted by PC (where PC ≡½RG
CðTCÞXYZ;
RG
C is the rotation matrix that transforms vectors from frame C
to G and ðTCÞXYZ is the position vector of the VC with respect
to the frame G). In real time, the simulator uses ROS to wirelessly
publish (i.e., transmit) pose-tagged images (i.e., images captured
by the VC with associated pose, i.e., PC) to the edge device. If
the VC’s pose is not updated, data from the GBDT can be pre-
loaded to the edge device. The edge device processes the pose-
tagged images along with the UAV’s captured image to estimate
the relative pose ΔP of the UAV’s camera with respect to the
VC (where ΔP ≡½ΔRC
CAðTCAÞxyz; ΔRC
CA is the rotation matrix
that transforms vectors from frame CA to C and ðΔTCAÞxyz is the
© ASCE
04025123-2
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.3]
position vector of the UAV’s camera with respect to the frame C).
Because the GBDT and the real-world structure share the navigation
frame G, the UAV’s camera pose with respect to G (i.e., PCA≡
½RG
CAðTCAÞXYZ) can be recovered from ΔP and the VC’s pose.
The detailed mathematical relationships between these quantities
are provided in the Methods section, along with algorithms outlin-
ing the pose estimation process.
To increase the viewpoint overlap, multiple VCs denoted by CðiÞ
(where, i ¼ 1; 2 : : : N , N being the total number of VCs used) can
be placed at various locations in the simulator environment. Fig. 2,
illustrates this setting, which uses the same notation as with the case
of a single VC; however, the VC sustaining the highest viewpoint
overlap with the UAV’s camera should be selected first.
The proposed GBDTpose2 method makes the following
assumptions:
1. Regions [i.e., trustworthy regions (TWRs)] exist in the GBDT
and target structure that are geometrically and texturally similar.
2. At least one VC has a viewpoint overlap with the onboard UAV
camera to allow for accurate pose estimation.
3. Wireless network service is available for communication between
the base-station computer and edge device via ROS messages.
Regarding the first assumption, although an apparent domain
shift is seen between the target structure and the GBDT, the GBDT
is usually designed to be replete with regions (i.e., TWRs) that
are texturally and geometrically similar to the physical structure.
For example, references (Wang et al. 2022; Hoskere et al. 2022;
Narazaki et al. 2021, 2022; Levine and Spencer 2022) have pro-
posed techniques for developing a high-fidelity GBDT model,
which can provide abundant TWRs required by GBDTpose2. Fur-
thermore, previous research by the authors (Matiki et al. 2024) has
shown that even with a GBDT designed using minimal textural
manipulations, GBDTtags (similar to TWRs) could be detected by
a neural network trained only with synthetic images from the
GBDT. Nonetheless, for optimal performance, GBDTpose2 requires
a feature-rich GBDT with strong visual similarity to the physical
twin. Furthermore, the use of numerous VCs to capture images from
various viewpoints and the option of equipping the UAV with mul-
tiple cameras can significantly increase the likelihood of observ-
ing TWRs.
For an accurate estimate of the UAV’s pose to be achieved,
the viewpoint of at least one VC should overlap with the UAV’s
camera. Ensuring sufficient viewpoint overlap with a single VC
can be challenging; however, deploying multiple VCs at various
locations within the GBDT significantly enhances the likelihood
of success. Although this study did not consider dynamically
updating the poses of the VCs, their positions could be adjusted
based on the UAV’s prior pose, transmitted from the edge device
to the base station via ROS. Consequently, this research assumes
the use of an adequately distributed set of VCs to maintain con-
sistent viewpoint overlap, achievable using a simulation environ-
ment such as Gazebo.
Without a stable wireless connection, the transmission of data
such as images, HOG features, and VCs poses to the edge device
may be disrupted, potentially halting UAV localization. However,
if the VCs are statically configured, their associated data can be
preloaded onto the edge device, allowing the system to continue
operating during temporary service interruptions. In cases where
the VCs are dynamically updated, previously known VC poses and
data can still support localization on the edge device until connec-
tivity is restored. Therefore, GBDTpose2 relies on a wireless con-
nection primarily for initialization and for ensuring the integrity
of transmitted data. This communication framework aligns with the
bidirectional communication strategies proposed by Molinar et al.
(2023) and Hua and Masatoshi (2021) for linking digital and
physical twins. The current approach, however, leverages ROS
and Gazebo, which have proven to be robust for UAV localization.
Methods
This section outlines the methods used in GBDTpose2. The central
scheme of the framework is to localize a UAV by aligning its view-
point with that of a VC placed within a digital twin. This digital
twin closely replicates the geometry and appearance of the real-
world environment, even without GPS. Conceptually, the UAV
navigates by using images from the VC as a reference map, lever-
aging them as visual and spatial guides to estimate its pose within
the physical environment. Referring to Fig. 2, the configuration of
any VC (i.e., CðiÞ) with respect to G and the configuration of the
UAV’s camera (i.e., CA) with respect to CðiÞ can respectively be
written as
XCi
G ≡

RG
Ci
ðTCiÞXYZ
01×3
11×1

∈SEð3Þ
ð1Þ
Fig. 1. Pictorial illustration of problem formulation for a UAV navi-
gating the environment of the physical structure and a single VC in the
GBDT’s environment.
Fig. 2. Pictorial illustration of problem formulation for a UAV navi-
gating the environment of the physical structure, with multiple VCs in
the GBDT’s environment.
© ASCE
04025123-3
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.4]
ΔXCA
Ci ≡

ΔRCi
CA
ðΔTCAÞxyzðiÞ
01×3
11×1

∈SEð3Þ
ð2Þ
Therefore, the configuration of CA with respect to G can be
computed as
XCA
G
¼ XCi
G ΔXCA
Ci
ð3Þ
where
XCA
G ≡

RG
CA
ðTCAÞXYZ
01×3
11×1

∈SEð3Þ
ð4Þ
Given the configuration of CA with respect to the UAV’s body
reference frame denoted by XCA
B , the configuration of the UAV with
respect to G can be computed as
XB
G ¼ XCA
G ðXCA
B Þ−1
ð5Þ
However, the transformation matrix ΔXCA
Ci
is unknown and
must be computed for the UAV to be localized using Eq. (5).
Fig. 3 presents the computational procedure for estimating the
transformation ΔXCA
Ci given a sequence of pose-tagged images pub-
lished from the base-station to the edge-device. Each of the two
main blocks (i.e., the edge device and base-station blocks) com-
prises one or more subblocks (i.e., the red boxes in Fig. 3), which
are ROS nodes (i.e., programs running within ROS), that contribute
to the computation of ΔXCA
Ci on the edge device. Furthermore, these
ROS nodes can communicate with each other either locally (i.e.,
within the same device) or wirelessly (i.e., between the base station
and edge device) using the ROS messaging protocol. In Fig. 3,
communication occurring within a device is denoted by blue solid
lines, while wireless communication links are represented by black
dashed lines. For wireless communication to be possible, both
devices (i.e., the edge device and the base-station computer) must
be on the same network (ROS 2018b). Moreover, with ROS, bidi-
rectional communication (i.e., to and from transmission of data) is
also possible, allowing the UAV’s prior pose to be transmitted to the
base-station computer as demonstrated in Fig. 3. To clearly de-
scribe the contribution of each of the blocks in Fig. 3 in estimating
the transformation ΔXCA
Ci , the remainder of this sections employs
the Smart Structures Technology Laboratory steel truss bridge (or
SSTL bridge) as the physical twin.
Base-Station Block
Referring to the base-station block in Fig. 3, there are two ROS
nodes (i.e., the Gazebo node and Auxiliary node) responsible for
using the GBDT to generate the information needed for computa-
tion of ΔXCA
Ci on the edge device. First, the Gazebo node publishes
images of the GBDT captured by the VCs (together with the VCs
poses) to the Auxiliary node. The Auxiliary node then transforms
the RGB images of the GBDT to gradient images and also com-
putes the HOG of the RGB images captured by all VCs. OpenCV
library functions were leveraged for computation of gradient im-
ages and HOGs. These data (gradient images, depth images, VCs
poses, and HOG) corresponding to all VCs are transmitted wire-
lessly by the Auxiliary node (on the base station) to the edge device.
The Main node running on the edge device subscribes to the data
published from the base station to perform further computations
to estimate ΔXCA
Ci . Although Gazebo was used for this research
to host the VCs and GBDT (because it has a ROS Interface for
data transmission), other real-time simulators (e.g., Miller 2021;
Morse 2009) can also be used, provided that RGB-D images and
Fig. 3. Computational procedure for estimation of a UAV’s relative pose with respect to VCs.
© ASCE
04025123-4
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.5]
the VC poses can be obtained and transmitted to the edge device in
real time.
Edge Device Block
To estimate the transformation ΔXCA
Ci , GBDTpose2 uses patterns of
the GBDT transmitted from the base station and corresponding pat-
terns of the physical twin. To this end, the edge device block first
captures raw RGB-D images with the UAV’s onboard camera, via
the UAV Camera node (shown in Fig. 3). The captured images are
transformed by the Auxiliary node (similar to the Auxiliary node in
the base station) to compute gradient images and HOG, respec-
tively. The Main node (subscribing to the Auxiliary nodes on the
edge device and base station, respectively) uses the HOG similarity
metric to select the CðiÞ sustaining highest viewpoint overlap with
CA. Then, TWRs are detected and used with the ICP algorithm
to compute ΔXCA
Ci . Given that the transformation matrix XCA
B
is
known, the UAV’s current pose can be calculated [using Eq. (5)]
and sent to the UAV’s flight controller (as shown in Fig. 3). While
all computations on the edge device could be performed on the base
station, with the poses then transmitted to the flight controller via
the edge device, the architecture shown in Fig. 3 is designed to
minimize overall latency in calculating the UAV’s pose, ensuring
it meets the real-time requirements of the flight controller.
Selecting the Best Virtual Camera Using Viewpoint
Similarity Metric
Localization of the UAV using Eq. (5) requires that the UAV’s on-
board camera sustains a viewpoint overlap with the VCs (i.e., view-
point similarity); however, determining the similarity between two
images is a nontrivial task (Aljanabi et al. 2019; Chalom et al. 2013;
Douze et al. 2021). Even further, measuring the similarity between
two images from different domains (i.e., the GBDT and physical
twin) is more challenging due to domain shift (Pinheiro 2018;
Narazaki et al. 2023; Zhang and Gao 2022). While various tech-
niques have been developed to resolve this issue, the HOG tech-
nique for image similarity analysis has been found to be invariant
to moderate geometric and light intensity changes (Dalal and Triggs
2005; Lai and Teoh 2014). Thus, this research uses HOG to quan-
tify the viewpoint similarity of each VC (i.e., CðiÞ) to CA given their
RGB image pairs. To this end, the HOG of the image corresponding
to CA, i.e., HOGCA ∈R1×M, is compared against HOGðiÞ ∈R1×M
(for each CðiÞ) and the L2 norm is computed. Then, the CðiÞ with
minimum L2 norm is returned for subsequent computations. The
computations of HOGðiÞ take place on the auxiliary node within
the base-station computer, so that the edge device is relieved of
these computations.
TWRs for Relative Pose Estimation with ICP
The ICP algorithm (Besl and McKay 1992; Wang and Zhao 2017;
Zhang et al. 2021b) is applied to align the PCs from the physical
and digital twins to estimate the relative pose between the devices
corresponding to those PCs. The standard ICP algorithm is known
to converge to suboptimal estimates for very large PCs and/or for
PCs with very dissimilar distributions (Li et al. 2020; Marchel et al.
2020). Furthermore, the standard ICP algorithm is blind to the con-
tents of the scene, such that if the scenes are very different, the ICP
algorithm still returns a relative pose which would be erroneous.
Although direct feature matching between images corresponding
to CA and CðiÞ using SIFT (Lowe 2004) can sometimes yield better
results, for scenes with repetitive patterns, SIFT features can suffer
significant ambiguities. Therefore, this research employs TWRs to
guide the ICP algorithm for accurate relative pose estimation be-
tween CA and CðiÞ.
While the standard ICP algorithm can be applied for relative
pose estimation (i.e., ΔXCA
Ci ) with GBDTpose2, unmodeled objects
present in the physical environment may introduce significant
alignment errors. TWRs are therefore introduced to ensure that
the sampled point clouds originate from regions in the digital twin
that are known to share geometric and textural similarity with
the physical environment. Additionally, by restricting the sampled
point cloud to these regions, the computational load is reduced,
which can enable the ICP algorithm to converge more quickly,
facilitating real-time use in UAV navigation. For detection and
extraction of TWRs, GBDTpose2 uses the gradient image of the
GBDT (i.e., ∇Ig) and the gradient image of the physical twin
(i.e., ∇Ip). Figs. 4(c–d) visualize ∇Ig and ∇Ip taken for the SSTL
bridge (Narazaki et al. 2020). Notice in Figs. 4(c–d) that the use
of gradient images significantly reduces the textural domain shift
between the GBDT and the physical twin and enhances their geo-
metric similarity.
Having computed ∇Ig and ∇Ip, they are stripped into patches
(100 × 100 patches are used for this research), and for each patch in
∇Ig, its histogram is computed and compared against the histogram
of all patches found in ∇Ip using the cosine similarity score, as
illustrated in Fig. 4(e). If the highest similarity score for a patch
in ∇Ig with any patch in ∇Ip exceeds a set threshold, then the patch
is classified to the same group as the patch in ∇Ip that yielded that
score. While smaller patches would be desirable (as it allows the
cosine similarity metric to be more discriminative), too many patches
can increase the computational burden on the edge device. Hence
the patch size for this research was selected by limiting the total
number of patches to 24. Furthermore, a check is made to ensure
overlap between the corresponding patches in ∇Ig and ∇Ip. This is
achieved by projecting the patch coordinates from the image plane
into their respective camera frames using the depth values of the
patch image coordinates. The intersection over union (IoU) of the
projected planar patches is computed to quantify the degree of
overlap. Because the depth values are derived from the RGB-D
images, this check inherently accounts for image scale. Notably,
this check assumes that viewpoint overlap already exists between
CA and the selected CðiÞ, as determined by the HOG similarity
metric. However, this assumption becomes unreliable if the HOG
similarity metric fails, as discussed in the validation section. Finally,
note that some of the selected TWRs may correspond to the back-
ground of the environment. This does not pose a problem as long
as the depth sensor provides valid depth values for the TWRs
and the overlap check is satisfied. If undesirable, the background
(and similar regions) can be isolated using pretrained object rec-
ognition models such as YOLO V8 (Ultralytics 2024, “https://docs
.ultralytics.com/”). Indeed, pretrained models such as YOLO V8
can be fine-tuned to directly detect TWRs, albeit at the expense of
increased computational cost.
Because computing TWRs for all patches can be expensive on
the edge device, the NumPy library in Python is used for parallel
computations. Thus, ∇Ig is reshaped into RNg×p×p, while ∇Ip is
also reshaped into RNr×p×p and the similarity score computed to
obtain S ∈RNg×Nr (where Ng and Nr represent the number of
patches in ∇Ig and ∇Ip, respectively). The maximum score for
each patch in ∇Ig is returned so that s ∈RNg×1 becomes the class
of each patch in ∇Ig. Moreover, the ∇Ig corresponding to each VC
is computed in the base-station computer and published wirelessly
to the edge device, further relieving the edge device of the com-
putational burdens. At the conclusion of this stage, one or more
TWRs [shown in Figs. 4(f–g)] must have been detected for use.
© ASCE
04025123-5
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.6]
Having detected the TWRs in the images corresponding to
CA and CðiÞ, respectively, the next step is to estimate the relative
pose using the ICP algorithm. Within these TWRs, random two-
dimensional (2D) pixel coordinates are projected into 3D space
using the corresponding depth values and intrinsic parameters of
each camera to generate the 3D point clouds. This research initi-
alizes the ICP algorithm by setting ΔRCi
CA to the identity matrix (i.e.
I3×3) and ðΔTCAÞxyzðiÞ to a vector of zeros (i.e., 03×1). Algorithm 1
presents the how the standard ICP algorithm can be modified us-
ing TWRs.
Fig. 4. (a) GBDT image; (b) physical twin image; (c) gradient image of GBDT (∇Ig); (d) gradient image of physical twin (∇Ip); (e) computation of
similarity scores from each patch in ∇Ig with respect to all patches in ∇Ip; (f) detected TWRs in GBDT image; and (g) detected TWRs in physical
twin image.
© ASCE
04025123-6
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.7]
Algorithm 1. ICP with TWRs for Relative Pose Estimation
Load the TWRs of ∇Ig and ∇Ip
Set number of ICP iterations, i.e., Nc
Set convergence threshold, i.e., ε
Set the number of TWRs to use, i.e., nm
Define the number of 2D pixel coordinates to sample within each
TWR, i.e., np
Create an empty list to store the sampled 3D points, i.e., Γci←½ and
ΓCA←½;
Extract first nm TWRs in ∇Ig and ∇Ip, respectively.
for each extracted TWR in ∇Ig and ∇Ip do:
Sample np 2D pixel coordinates within the TWR in the image
plane for CA and CðiÞ, respectively.
Extract depth values of the sampled np 2D pixel coordinates.
Convert the sampled 2D pixel coordinates from image
coordinates to homogenous coordinates.
Project the 2D pixel coordinates to the camera 3D frame using
the corresponding intrinsic matrices.
Store the 3D coordinates in Γci and ΓCA, respectively.
end for
if Γci is not empty do:
Initialize ðΔRCi
CAÞ0←I3×3 and ðΔTCA
xyzðiÞÞ
0←03×1
Given Γci, ΓCA, ðΔRCi
CAÞ0, ðΔTCA
xyzðiÞÞ
0, Nc, and ε run the standard
ICP algorithm.
Return ΔRCi
CA and ðΔTCAÞxyzðiÞ and compose ΔXCA
Ci
end if
Algorithm 2. Localization of CA Using Pose-Tagged Images
Published by Base-Station Computer
Launch the Gazebo world file that hosts GBDT and VCs in the
base-station computer.
Set confidence threshold for TWR detection, i.e., τ
Set the overlap threshold for TWRs, i.e., γ
Set the patch size p
Set the number of bins for histogram similarity computation,
i.e., nb
While UAV camera streams images, in the main node do:
Subscribe to all topics published by base-station computer.
Subscribe to HOGCA array topic published by auxiliary node
within edge device.
Instantiate and store all the subscribed gradient images ∇Ig for
each CðiÞ into Gci
Instantiate and store all the HOGðiÞ for each CðiÞ into Hci
Instantiate and store all pose messages XCi
G for each CðiÞ into Oci
Instantiate and store into Kci all the intrinsic camera matrices Kci
for each VC.
Set HCA←HOGCA, i.e., HCA ∈R1×M
Reshape Hci into RN ×M; where N is the total number of CðiÞ
Compute argmin
ci
kHci −HCAk2
Return the index k of Hci with minimum L2 norm.
Given k extract the corresponding XCk
G from Oci
Given k extract the corresponding ∇Ig
ðkÞ ∈RHg×Wg from Gci
Given k extract the corresponding camera intrinsic matrix,
i.e., Kk from Kci
Extract Ng patches of size p × p from ∇Ig
ðkÞ ∈RHg×Wg to
compose Pg
ðkÞ ∈RNg×p×p
Extract Nr patches of size p × p from ∇Ip ∈RHr×Wr to
compose PR ∈RNr×p×p
Set TWRk←½ to store the TWRs in ∇Ig
ðkÞ
Set TWRCA←½ to store the TWRs in ∇Ip
Instantiate S←½ to store similarity scores.
Compute the histogram of PR along the first dimension using
nb bins.
for each patch j in Pg
ðkÞ do:
Compute the histogram of patch j using nb bins.
Compute the cosine similarity for patch j against all patches
in PR
Store the scores in S
end for
Using S, extract the patches in Pg
ðkÞ and PR, respectively, with
similarity scores exceeding τ.
Extract the depth values of vertices of the patches and project the
patches to the respective camera 3D frames.
Calculate the IoU of the corresponding projected planar patches.
Store the corresponding patches with IoU greater than γ into
TWRk and TWRCA, respectively.
Given TWRk, TWRCA, Kk, and KCA run Algorithm 1 to
compute ΔXCA
Ci
Compute XCA
G ←XCk
G ðΔXCA
Ck Þ
Compute XB
G←XCA
G ðXCA
B Þ−1
end while
In Algorithm 1, the number of points np to be used for ICP iter-
ation can be set to vary across the TWRs. Furthermore, NumPy can
be used to allow for parallelization of the projection of TWRs from
the image plane to the camera’s 3D reference frame to allow for the
computation of IoU (or overlap between the patches). This research
used nm ¼ 3, np ¼ 10, Nc ¼ 20, and ε ¼ 1e −5 for Algorithm 1.
For Algorithm 2, τ ¼ 0.5, γ ¼ 0.1, and Ng ¼ Nr ¼ 24 were used.
Another key hyperparameter for detecting TWRs is the patch size
p. In this research, p was set to 100, which was determined to be
satisfactory based on the total number of computationally feasible
patches (i.e., Ng ¼ Nr ¼ 24). These hyperparameters are not uni-
versally optimal and can be fine-tuned through trial and error in a
simulation environment, such as Gazebo, prior to deployment on
the UAV. Lastly, Algorithms 1 and 2 can operate without TWRs by
sampling 3D point cloud pairs over the entire image.
GBDTpose2 Validation
GBDTpose2 is first validated numerically using Gazebo and ROS
and subsequently experimentally in the laboratory. For both the
numerical and laboratory tests, a steel truss bridge is used as the
physical twin because it exhibits repetitive patterns that are char-
acteristic of civil infrastructure. In the numerical validation, the per-
formance of GBDTpose2 is compared with ORB-SLAM3 (Campos
et al. 2021) and RTAB-Map (Labbé and Michaud 2024), both of
which are feature-based SLAM algorithms that use RGB-D sequen-
ces. In the experimental validation, AprilTags (John and Edwin 2016)
were installed, and the PnP algorithm (Lu 2009) is used to provide a
reference solution. For the laboratory tests, GBDTpose2 is also com-
pared against ORB-SLAM3 and RTAB-Map to observe the robust-
ness against the drift errors.
Numerical Validation of GBDTpose2 Using
Gazebo and ROS
In Gazebo, 10 Openni Kinect (Gazebo 2014b) depth cameras were
set at predefined locations to function as VCs [shown in Fig. 5(a)].
The SSTL bridge structure measures approximately 5 m in length
and 1.5 m in height. Positioning the VCs at a distance of 2 m al-
lowed each camera to capture a substantial portion of the structure.
© ASCE
04025123-7
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.8]
For larger-scale structures, VCs may need to be placed farther away
and in greater numbers to ensure adequate coverage. Although up
to 1,000 VCs can be used on a 32.0 GB RAM Windows base-
station computer, only 10 VCs were used because the Jetson Nano
(which is the edge device used for laboratory tests) is overburdened
in calculating the HOG similarity for too many VCs. In addition to
the VCs in Gazebo, the UAV’s onboard camera, CA [also shown in
Fig. 5(a)], is assumed also be an Openni Kinect camera with the
same parameters as the VCs. Both the CA and the VCs stream im-
ages of the GBDT from Gazebo to the Main node where the relative
pose is calculated. Notice that because the pose of CA is known,
it was used to evaluate GBDTpose2 in the numerical simulation.
Figs. 5(a–c) demonstrate this setup.
Aside from comparing GBDTpose2 predictions against the
ground truth, other important considerations for the numerical tests
include (i) assessment of the efficacy of the HOG similarity metric
for VC selection; and (ii) assessment of the pose update rate of
GBDTpose2 for UAV navigation. The first numerical experiment
intended to assess the performance of GBDTpose2 under pure lat-
eral translation is shown in Fig. 6(a). The circular error probable
metric (or CEP), which measures the median error, together with
the root-mean-squared error (RMSE) metric, was used for evaluation.
Because the estimated poses align closely with the ground truths, a
zoomed-in visualization of the pose errors is provided in Fig. 6(b).
As illustrated in Fig. 6(a), a very high update rate for the poses is
achieved, which is attributed to the convergence speed of the ICP
algorithm when TWRs are used to sample a smaller 3D point
cloud. Note that the standard ICP algorithm can also converge
quickly when properly initialized and may produce accurate rel-
ative poses when the GBDT closely matches the physical environ-
ment. On the other hand, direct assessment of the efficacy of
GBDTpose2 in selecting the VC with highest viewpoint overlap
is challenging; nonetheless, the effect of a poor VC selection can
be seen from the estimated poses. For example, in between the
pairs of red dashed lines in Fig. 6(a), the returned poses are less
accurate due to ambiguity of the HOG similarity metric when CA
is around the central region of the GBDT [shown in Fig. 6(d)].
These ambiguities arise due to the repetitive pattern of the bridge
around the central region. Figs. 6(c and e) show some of the cor-
responding VC and CA images when CA is around the left and
right portions of the bridge, respectively, and for these regions the
corresponding patterns are very distinctive, allowing for the HOG
similarity metric to work well. Moreover, the authors have ob-
served that detailed planning of the VCs pose together with CA’s
target locations can reduce errors, which will be a direction for
future studies.
The second numerical experiment is to assess the performance
of GBDTpose2 under lateral translation combined with rotational
perturbations of CA ranging from −3° to þ3° along the roll, pitch,
and yaw axes. As illustrated in Fig. 7(a), the errors for this second
Fig. 5. (a) VCs and CA in Gazebo (3D view); (b) plan view: VCs are spaced 0.6 m apart, and 2 m from the bridge; and (c) RGB images captured by
the 10 VCs.
© ASCE
04025123-8
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.9]
Fig. 6. (a) Pose estimation results under pure lateral translation; (b) zoomed-in visualization of pose errors in (a); (c) correct viewpoint association;
(d) incorrect viewpoint association; and (e) correct viewpoint association.
© ASCE
04025123-9
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.10]
Fig. 7. (a) Pose results under lateral translation with rotations; (b) correct viewpoint association; (c) correct viewpoint association; and (d) correct
viewpoint association.
© ASCE
04025123-10
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.11]
test are more uniformly spread than for the first. This result occurs
because the rotation of the CA provides variations that allow the
HOG similarity metric to work better even around the central re-
gions of the bridge. Moreover, Figs. 6(a) and 7(a) demonstrate that
the poses do not drift. This result can be explained by referring
to Eqs. (3)–(5), where the estimated UAV’s camera relative pose
(i.e., ΔXCA
Ci ) does not depend on any prior information. Further-
more, if the right VC is selected, then an accurate estimate of
ΔXCA
Ci (within centimeter error range) can be achieved, while being
drift-free.
The last series of numerical tests is designed to compare
GBDTpose2 against ORB-SLAM3 and RTAB-Map. These tests
consist of (i) pure lateral translation at a distance of 2.5 m from the
GBDT; and (ii) lateral translations combined with rotations rang-
ing from −3° to þ3° along the roll, pitch, and yaw axes. The code
to execute ORB-SLAM3 was obtained from its GitHub repository
(Tardos 2021), while RTAB-Map (which is available as a ROS
package) was directly run with ROS for these tests. In Figs. 8(a
and b) the position estimates corresponding to the ground truth,
ORB-SLAM3, RTAB-Map, and GBDTpose2 are shown in blue,
green, purple, and red, respectively. [In Fig. 8(a), the position es-
timates align closely with the ground truth, making discrepancies
barely noticeable.] Because ORB-SLAM3 and RTAB-Map set
their origins to the initial location of the camera, all position es-
timates shown in Figs. 8(a and b) are with respect to the initial
location of CA during simulation.
Both ORB-SLAM3 and RTAB-Map provide smooth and drift-
free pose estimates as seen in the plot of Fig. 8(a) and Table 1.
However, when the camera is rotated, ORB-SLAM3 fails to keep
track of the camera, while RTAB-Map drifts, as seen in Fig. 8(b)
Fig. 8. (a) Position estimates for pure lateral translation at 2.5 m away from the GBDT; and (b) position estimates for lateral translation with rotations
ranging −3° to þ3° at 2.5 m away from the GBDT.
© ASCE
04025123-11
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.12]
and Table 2 (which shows the CEP and RMSE errors). On the other
hand, the plot in Fig. 8(b) demonstrates that GBDTpose2 remains
robust to rotational perturbations, maintaining accuracy similar to
the case of pure lateral motions shown in Fig. 8(a). The failure of
ORB-SLAM3 results primarily from the repetitive patterns in the
simulation environment. Likewise, RTAB-Map drifts because cur-
rent poses are composed from the prior poses, which get easily cor-
rupted with repetitive patterns in the environment. Note that although
GBDTpose2 does not drift, some spurious pose estimates can occur
[i.e., the spikes in Fig. 8(a)] when the wrong VC is selected, which
would require additional postprocessing before transferring to the
flight controller of a UAV for navigation.
Laboratory Validation
A laboratory specimen of a steel truss bridge located in the Smart
Structures Technology Laboratory (SSTL) at the University of Il-
linois Urbana-Champaign was used for validation of GBDTpose2
[Fig. 9(a)]. A Holybro X500 drone equipped with a Jetson Nano
edge device and an Intel RealSense D455 camera [Fig. 9(b)] was
used to conduct these tests. The base-station computer used for
these tests is also located within 7 m of the UAV. Both the base-
station computer and Jetson Nano communicate wirelessly using the
Wi-Fi through ROS messages, and Jetson Nano runs GBDTpose2 to
Table 1. Simulation results (Scenario 1): pure lateral translations without
rotations
Algorithm
CEP
RMSE
X (m)
Y (m)
Z (m)
X (m)
Y (m)
Z (m)
ORB-SLAM3
0.038
0.002
0.008
0.058
0.012
0.013
RTAB-Map
0.040
0.005
0.013
0.054
0.007
0.013
GBDTpose2
0.204
0.106
0.095
0.376
0.336
0.219
Note: Results for comparison of GBDTpose2 against ORB-SLAM3 and
RTAB-Map in simulation under pure translations. Bold values signifies
the lowest error for each column (“X”, “Y”, “Z”) of the competing
localization algorithms. Smaller error is better.
Table 2. Simulation results (Scenario 2): lateral translations with rotations
ranging −3° to þ3°
Algorithm
CEP
RMSE
X (m)
Y (m)
Z (m)
X (m)
Y (m)
Z (m)
ORB-SLAM3
1.274
0.794
0.341
2.096
0.633
0.278
RTAB-Map
2.064
0.173
0.039
1.863
0.337
0.272
GBDTpose2
0.156
0.105
0.008
0.246
0.158
0.010
Note: Results for comparison of GBDTpose2 against ORB-SLAM3 and
RTAB-Map in simulation under combined lateral translations and
rotations. Bold values signifies the lowest error for each column (“X”,
“Y”, “Z”) of the competing localization algorithms. Smaller error is better.
Fig. 9. (a) GBDT and VCs in Gazebo running in the base-station computer in SSTL; (b) UAV with mounted camera, Jetson Nano, and WIFI adapter
in SSTL; and (c) AprilTags used for ground truth pose estimates, mounted on SSTL bridge.
© ASCE
04025123-12
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.13]
Fig. 10. (a) Pose results for laboratory static test No. 1. The UAV was positioned at the left end of the bridge; (b) Examples of matching image pairs:
the left image is from the VC, and the right is from the UAV’s camera. GBDTpose2 selects the VC with viewpoint overlap and detects TWRs (colored
boxes) for pose estimation; (c) Pose results for laboratory static test No. 2. The UAV was positioned at the right end of the bridge; (d) Corresponding
image pairs with the UAVat the right end of the bridge. GBDTpose2 selects VCs sustaining viewpoint overlap with the UAV’s camera; (e) Pose results
for laboratory lateral motion test with random rotational perturbations; (f) Corresponding image pairs with UAV under lateral motion with small
rotational perturbations. For most of the sequences, a VC with viewpoint overlap is selected; (g) Pose results for laboratory aggressive test, with very
large random rotational perturbations; and (h) Corresponding image pairs, with UAV camera under aggressive random motion. GBDTpose2 tries to
select the right VC but fails in some sequences under very large viewpoint discrepancies.
© ASCE
04025123-13
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.14]
localize the UAV, based on pose-tagged images published from the
base-station computer. Note that for field inspections, a reliable
wireless network is required to initialize and maintain the integrity
of transmitted data. Alternatively, the VCs can be statically posi-
tioned and their data preloaded from the base station onto the edge
device. To obtain reference (“ground truth”) data for pose estima-
tion, AprilTags were placed on the bridge [as shown in Fig. 9(c)],
and the coordinates of their corners were obtained with respect to G
for use with the PnP algorithm.
The UAV was set at locations within 2.5 m from the bridge for
the first two tests. These tests consist of a static test [shown in
Figs. 10(a–d)] whereby the UAV was fixed at some locations (to
mimic hovering motion of a drone) and a lateral motion test [shown
in Figs. 10(e–f)], which is similar to that performed for the numerical
Fig. 10. (Continued.)
© ASCE
04025123-14
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.15]
validation of GBDTpose2. Finally, an aggressive test [shown in
Figs. 10(g–h)] was conducted whereby the UAV was moved very
rapidly away from bridge and under large rotations.
For all the tests reported in Figs. 10(a–h), the position estimates
of the UAV show subcentimeter-level accuracy and do not drift;
i.e., errors do not accumulate over time. Even for the aggressive
test case [shown in Fig. 10(g–h)], GBDTpose2 can still provide
the pose of the UAV, once a VC with an overlapping viewpoint to
the UAV is chosen. However, the attitude estimates (roll, pitch, and
yaw angles) contain many outliers, which is partly attributed to the
errors in the ground truth measurements and wrong VC selection by
GBDTpose2.
GBDTpose2 was also compared against RTAB-Map in the lab-
oratory environment. ORB-SLAM3 was not used for evaluation be-
cause it was unstable and failed to keep track of the UAV’s position.
Fig. 11(a) and Table 3 shows the results of the position estimates
when the UAV was moved laterally and with minimal rotations,
while Fig. 11(b) and Table 4 show the case whereby random rota-
tions (within −5° to þ5° along the yaw axis) were introduced. These
results are similar to those obtained in simulation [i.e. Figs. 8(a
and b)], although RTAB-Map performed better for these tests than
those shown in Figs. 8(a and b), due to the diverse patterns in the
laboratory environment.
While RTAB-Map could provide accurate position estimates,
it tends to drift after extended periods of operation [as seen in
Fig. 11(b)], or when errors due to feature matching and tracking
Fig. 11. (a) Position estimates for lateral motion of UAV with very minimal rotations; and (b) position estimates for sideways motion of UAV with
rotations ranging −5° to þ5° along the yaw axis.
Table 3. Results (Scenario 1): lateral translations with small rotations
Algorithm
CEP
RMSE
X (m)
Y (m)
Z (m)
X (m)
Y (m)
Z (m)
RTAB-Map
0.760
0.131
0.076
0.749
0.184
0.140
GBDTpose2
0.169
0.129
0.021
0.493
0.186
0.114
Note: Results for comparison of GBDTpose2 against RTAB-Map under
minimal rotations. Bold values signifies the lowest error for each
column (“X”, “Y”, “Z”) of the competing localization algorithms.
Smaller error is better.
© ASCE
04025123-15
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.16]
occur. On the other hand, GBDTpose2 is drift-free, but its position
estimates are not smooth owing to selection of the wrong VC. Oc-
casionally, the impact of suboptimal VC selection by GBDTpose2
(its most significant limitation) can persist over an extended dura-
tion [as shown at the end of the X-GBDTpose2 plot in Fig. 11(b)].
This phenomenon (of spurious pose estimates) can affect localiza-
tion performance should the UAV hover for a prolonged period at a
location whereby the HOG similarity metric fails. A similar situation
can be found in the plots for Figs. 10(c–d) whereby GBDTpose2
struggled to select the VC with sufficient viewpoint overlap. Note
that the HOG similarity metric fails in these scenarios because the
feature representations obtained for the VC images differ substan-
tially from the features observed by the UAV’s camera, resulting
in ambiguities that lead to selecting the wrong VC. In outdoor
environments with moving objects and frequent occlusions, both
HOG-based matching and ICP may become less reliable due to
inconsistencies between the digital and physical twins. Moreover,
for larger environments, more TWRs may be needed to obtain
enough point cloud data for accurate pose estimation, which in-
creases computational load and can slow down GBDTpose2 on
edge devices. As an alternative, ICP can be run on a base-station
computer, with the calculated poses sent to the UAV through the
edge device. However, this setup may introduce latency, particu-
larly in unstable network conditions. Future studies will focus on
optimizing image spatial resolution alongside the HOG feature
representation to improve performance. Additionally, the optimi-
zation of VC poses will be explored using the prior pose of the
UAV, transmitted from the edge device. Nevertheless, GBDTpose2
does automatically correct for these errors once the UAV changes
its location or rotates, as demonstrated in Figs. 6(a), 7(a), 8(b),
10(e), and 11(a and b).
Conclusion
Autonomous navigation of UAVs is crucial for automation of regu-
lar inspection of civil infrastructure to ensure safety and function-
ality. For autonomous navigation to be achieved, a drift-free and
accurate pose estimate of the UAV is required. GPS can provide
for drift-free localization of a UAV, but in typical civil infrastructure
environments, GPS suffers interference and multipath effects, which
impairs availability and accuracy. Previous studies have attempted
to use virtual environments to localize a robot (also applicable for
UAVs) in a drift-free fashion. However, ambiguities result from fea-
ture correspondences of local patterns between the real and virtual
image pairs, and the lack of full coverage of the navigation field has
not yet been resolved. This paper presented GBDTpose2, whose
goal is to provide a drift-free and accurate pose estimate of a UAV
using a digital twin approach. To this end, GBDTpose2 employs
a GBDT alongside multiple VCs to localize a UAV by matching
global textural and geometric patterns observed by the UAV’s on-
board camera and the VCs. GBDTpose2 also enabled a bidirectional
communication between the UAV and the VCs that can allow for
reconfiguration of the VCs to correct for errors in the pose estimates.
Numerical and laboratory experiments have been conducted to
validate GBDTpose2. These tests include lateral translation with
and without rotational perturbations (to mimic an actual UAV in
motion) and static tests (whereby the drone was held stationary, to
mimic hovering motion of a UAV). Results show that GBDTpose2
can not only enable drift-free self-localization of a UAV, but also
provide centimeter-level position estimates of the UAV, together
with an accurate attitude estimate, if a VC sustaining viewpoint
overlap with the UAV is chosen for relative pose estimation. If the
wrong VC is selected, spurious pose estimates results, but GBD-
Tpose2 can automatically correct for these errors when a VC with
adequate viewpoint overlap is chosen. In comparison to ORB-
SLAM3 and RTAB-Map, GBDTpose2 does not drift, but the
frame-to-frame pose estimates are not as smooth, which would re-
quire additional postprocessing before use for autonomous UAV
navigation. Future studies will develop sophisticated techniques
for replanning the poses of all VCs and selecting the VC with high-
est viewpoint overlap with the UAV to reduce the pose errors. Ad-
ditionally, the processing speed of GBDTpose2 will be enhanced
to support the use of more VCs in the base station, leading to more
accurate pose estimates for seamless autonomous UAV navigation
in GPS-denied environments. These improvements will facilitate
the automation of civil infrastructure inspections using UAVs.
Data Availability Statement
Some or all data, models, or code generated or used during the
study are proprietary or confidential in nature and may only be pro-
vided with restrictions.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support
by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Contract/Purchase Order
No. W9132rT-22-2-0014).
Author Contributions
Thomas Matiki: Conceptualization; Formal analysis; Methodology;
Validation; Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.
Yasutaka Narazaki: Investigation; Methodology; Writing – original
draft; Writing – review and editing. Girish Chowdhary: Supervision;
Writing – review and editing. Billie F. Spencer: Funding acquisition;
Investigation; Methodology; Project administration; Resources;
Software; Supervision; Writing – original draft; Writing – review
and editing.
References
Agdas, D., J. A. Rice, J. R. Martinez, and I. R. Lasa. 2016. “Comparison of
visual inspection and structural-health monitoring as bridge condition
assessment methods.” J. Perform. Constr. Facil. 30 (3): 04015049.
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CF.1943-5509.0000802.
Agnisarman, S., S. Lopes, K. C. Madathil, K. Piratla, and A. Gramopadhye.
2019. “A survey of automation-enabled human-in-the-loop systems for
infrastructure visual inspection.” Autom. Constr. 97 (Jan): 52–76. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2018.10.019.
Ali, R., D. Kang, G. Suh, and Y. J. Cha. 2021. “Real-time multiple damage
mapping using autonomous UAV and deep faster region-based neural
Table 4. Results (Scenario 1): lateral translations with rotations ranging
−5° to þ5°
Algorithm
CEP
RMSE
X (m)
Y (m)
Z (m)
X (m)
Y (m)
Z (m)
RTAB-Map
3.657
0.284
0.314
3.940
0.304
0.460
GBDTpose2
0.306
0.085
0.048
2.045
0.131
0.230
Note: Results for comparison of GBDTpose2 against RTAB-Map under
minimal rotations. Bold values signifies the lowest error for each
column (“X”, “Y”, “Z”) of the competing localization algorithms.
Smaller error is better.
© ASCE
04025123-16
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.17]
networks for GPS-denied structures.” Autom. Constr. 130 (Oct): 103831.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2021.103831.
Aljanabi, M. A., Z. M. Hussain, N. A. A. Shnain, and S. F. Lu. 2019.
“Design of a hybrid measure for image similarity: A statistical, alge-
braic, and information-theoretic approach.” Supplement, Eur. J. Remote
Sens. 52 (S4): 2–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/22797254.2019.1628617.
Arshad, S., and G.-W. Kim. 2023. “A robust feature matching strategy for
fast and effective visual place recognition in challenging environmental
conditions.” Int. J. Control Autom. Syst. 21 (3): 948–962. https://doi.org
/10.1007/s12555-021-0927-x.
Arshad, S., and T.-H. Park. 2024. “SVS-VPR: A semantic visual and spatial
information-based hierarchical visual place recognition for autonomous
navigation in challenging environmental conditions.” Sensors 24 (3):
906. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24030906.
Besl, P. J., and N. D. McKay. 1992. “Method for registration of 3-D
shapes.” In Sensor fusion IV: Control paradigms and data structures.
Bellingham, WA: International Society for Optics and Photonics.
Bloesch, M., S. Omari, M. Hutter, and R. Siegwart. 2015. “ROVIO: Robust
visual inertial odometry using a direct EKF-based approach.” In Proc.,
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). New York:
IEEE.
Campos, C., R. Elvira, J. J. G. Rodríguez, J. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tard´os.
2021. “ORB-SLAM3: An accurate open-source library for visual, visual–
inertial, and multimap SLAM.” IEEE Trans. Rob. 37 (6): 1874–1890.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2021.3075644.
Chalom, E., E. Asa, and E. Biton. 2013. “Measuring image similarity:
An overview of some useful applications.” IEEE Instrum. Meas. Mag.
16 (1): 24–28. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIM.2013.6417053.
Chen, H., Z. Luo, J. Zhang, L. Zhou, X. Bai, Z. Hu, C. L. Tai, and L. Quan.
2021. “Learning to match features with seeded graph matching network.”
In Proc., IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV). New York:
IEEE.
Chowdhary, G., E. N. Johnson, D. Magree, A. Wu, and A. Shein. 2013.
“GPS-denied indoor and outdoor monocular vision aided navigation and
control of unmanned aircraft.” J. Field Rob. 30 (3): 415–438. https://doi
.org/10.1002/rob.21454.
Conte, G., and P. Doherty. 2009. “Vision-based unmanned aerial vehicle
navigation using geo-referenced information.” J. Adv. Signal Process.
2009 (1): 387308. https://doi.org/10.1155/2009/387308.
Dalal, N., and B. Triggs. 2005. “Histograms of oriented gradients for hu-
man detection.” In Proc., IEEE Computer Society Conf. on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. New York: IEEE.
Davison, A. J., I. D. Reid, N. D. Molton, and O. Stasse. 2007. “Mono-
SLAM: Real-time single camera SLAM.” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 29 (6): 1052–1067. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2007
.1049.
Doherty, K., D. Fourie, and J. Leonard. 2019. “Multimodal semantic
SLAM with probabilistic data association.” In Proc., 2019 Int. Conf.
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). New York: IEEE.
Dorafshan, S., and M. Maguire. 2018. “Bridge inspection: Human perfor-
mance, unmanned aerial systems and automation.” J. Civ. Struct. Health
Monit. 8 (3): 443–476. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13349-018-0285-4.
Douze, M., et al. 2021. “The 2021 image similarity dataset and challenge.”
Preprint, submitted June 17, 2021. https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09672.
Drew, S., H. Andersen, X. Du, X. Shen, M. Meghjani, Y. H. Eng,
D. Rus, and M. H. Ang. 2017. “Perception, planning, control, and co-
ordination for autonomous vehicles.” Machines 5 (1): 6. https://doi.org
/10.3390/machines5010006.
Duncan, S., T. I. Stewart, M. Oliver, S. Mavoa, D. MacRae, H. M. Badland,
and M. J. Duncan. 2013. “Portable global positioning system receivers:
Static validity and environmental conditions.” Am. J. Prev. Med. 44 (2):
e19–e29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2012.10.013.
Engel, J., V. Koltun, and D. Cremers. 2017. “Direct sparse odometry.” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 40 (3): 611–625. https://doi.org/10
.1109/TPAMI.2017.2658577.
FHWA. 2004. Federal Highway Administration: National bridge inspection
standards. Washington, DC: FHWA.
FRA (Federal Railroad Administration). 2010. Federal railroad administration:
Bridge safety standards. Washington, DC: FRA.
Gazebo. 2014a. “Gazebo documentation.” Accessed June 20, 2023.
https://staging.gazebosim.org/home.
Gazebo. 2014b. “Gazebo plugins in ROS.” Accessed June 20, 2023. https://
classic.gazebosim.org/tutorials?tut=ros_gzplugins#OpenniKinect.
Guclu, O., and A. Burak. 2017. “Fast and effective loop closure detection to
improve SLAM performance.” J. Intell. Rob. Syst. 93 (3): 495–517.
Hallermann, N., and G. Morgenthal. 2014. “Visual inspection strategies for
large bridges using Unmanned Aerial (UAV).” In Proc., 7th IABMAS,
Int. Conf. on Bridge Maintenance, Safety and Management, 661–667.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Hoskere, V., Y. Narazaki, and B. F. Spencer Jr. 2022. “Physics-based graph-
ics models in 3D synthetic environments as autonomous vision-based
inspection testbeds.” Sensors 22 (2): 532. https://doi.org/10.3390
/s22020532.
Hua, Z., and H. Masatoshi. 2021. “A decision support system for urban
agriculture using digital twin: A case study with aquaponics.” IEEE
Access 9 (Feb): 35691–35708.
John, W., and O. Edwin. 2016. “AprilTag 2: Efficient and robust fiducial
detection.” In Proc., IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). New York: IEEE.
Khaloo, A., D. Lattanzi, K. Cunningham, R. Dell’Andrea, and M. Riley.
2017. “Unmanned aerial vehicle inspection of the Placer River trail
bridge through image-based 3D modelling.” Struct. Infrastruct. Eng.
14 (1): 124–136. https://doi.org/10.1080/15732479.2017.1330891.
Klein, G., and D. Murray. 2007. “Parallel tracking and mapping for
small AR workspaces.” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 29 (6):
1052–1067.
Kwak, J., and Y. Sung. 2018. “Autonomous UAV flight control for GPS-
based navigation.” IEEE Access 6 (Jul): 37947–37955. https://doi.org
/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2854712.
Labbé, M., and F. Michaud. 2024. “RTAB-map as an open-source lidar and
visual SLAM library for large-scale and long-term online operation.”
J. Field Rob. 24 (2): 416–446.
Lai, C. Q., and S. S. Teoh. 2014. “A review on pedestrian detection tech-
niques based on Histogram of Oriented gradient feature.” In Proc., IEEE
Student Conf. on Research and Development. New York: IEEE.
Levine, N. M., and B. F. Spencer Jr. 2022. “Post-earthquake building evalu-
ation using UAVs: A BIM-based digital twin framework.” Sensors 22 (3):
873. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22030873.
Li, P., R. Wang, Y. Wang, and W. Tao. 2020. “Evaluation of the ICP algorithm
in 3D point cloud registration.” IEEE Access 8 (Apr): 68030–68048.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2986470.
Lin, H.-Y., and C.-H. He. 2021. “Mobile robot self-localization using omni-
directional vision with feature matching from real and virtual spaces.”
Appl. Sci. 11 (8): 3360. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11083360.
Lindenberger, P., P.-E. Sarlin, and M. Pollefeys. 2023. “LightGlue: Local
feature matching at light speed.” In Proc., IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. on
Computer Vision (ICCV). New York: IEEE.
Lowe, D. G. 2004. “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant key-
points.” Int. J. Comput. Vis. 60 (2): 91–110. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:
VISI.0000029664.99615.94.
Lu, X. X. 2009. “A review of solutions for perspective-n-point problem in
camera pose estimation.” J. Phys. 1087 (5): 052009. https://doi.org/10
.1088/1742-6596/1087/5/052009.
Ma, J., X. Jiang, A. Fan, J. Jiang, and J. Yan. 2020. “Image matching from
handcrafted to deep features: A survey.” Int. J. Comput. Vis. 129 (1):
23–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-020-01359-2.
Malekloo, A., E. Ozer, M. AlHamaydeh, and M. Girolami. 2022. “Machine
learning and structural health monitoring overview with emerging tech-
nology and high-dimensional data source highlights.” Struct. Health
Monit. 21 (4): 1906–1955. https://doi.org/10.1177/14759217211036880.
Marchel, Ł., C. Spech, and M. Specht. 2020. “Testing the accuracy of the
modified ICP algorithm with multimodal weighting factors.” Energies
13 (22): 5939. https://doi.org/10.3390/en13225939.
Matiki, T., Y. Narazaki, G. Chowdhary, and B. F. Spencer Jr. 2024. “A
graphics-based digital twin framework for accurate localization of UAVs
in GPS-denied environments.” Adv. Struct. Eng. 27 (16): 2879–2900.
https://doi.org/10.1177/13694332241291256.
Miller, D. 2021. “Advance your robot autonomy with ROS 2 and unity.”
Accessed July 20, 2023. https://unity.com/.
© ASCE
04025123-17
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
[p.18]
Molinar, J., J. Garcia, R. Robles, C. Mendoza, J. Reyes, A. Choudhuri, and
A. Flores-Abad. 2023. “Digitally assisted development of a space robotic
arm for satellite applications.” In Proc., ASCEND 2023. Reston, VA:
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Morse. 2009. “ROS and MORSE tutorial.” Accessed July 20, 2023.
https://www.openrobots.org/morse/doc/stable/user/beginner_tutorials
/ros_tutorial.html.
Mur-Artal, R., J. M. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tardos. 2015. “ORB-SLAM:
A versatile and accurate monocular SLAM system.” IEEE Trans. Rob.
31 (5): 1147–1163. https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2015.2463671.
Narazaki, Y., F. Gomez, V. Hoskere, M. D. Smith, and B. F. Spencer. 2020.
“Efficient development of vision-based dense three-dimensional displace-
ment measurement algorithms using physics-based graphics models.”
Struct. Health Monit. 20 (4): 1841–1863. https://doi.org/10.1177
/1475921720939522.
Narazaki, Y., V. Hoskere, G. Chowdhary, and B. F. Spencer Jr. 2022.
“Vision-based navigation planning for autonomous post-earthquake in-
spection of reinforced concrete railway viaducts using unmanned aerial
vehicles.” Autom. Constr. 137 (May): 104214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.autcon.2022.104214.
Narazaki, Y., V. Hoskere, K. Yoshida, B. F. Spencer, and Y. Fujino. 2021.
“Synthetic environments for vision-based structural condition assess-
ment of Japanese high-speed railway viaducts.” Mech. Syst. Sig. Process.
160 (Nov): 107850. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2021.107850.
Narazaki, Y., W. Pang, G. Wang, and W. Chai. 2023. “Unsupervised domain
adaptation approach for vision-based semantic understanding of bridge
inspection scenes without manual annotations.” J. Bridge Eng. 29 (2):
04023118. https://doi.org/10.1061/JBENF2.BEENG-6490.
Newcombe, R., S. Lovegrove, and A. Davison. 2011. “DTAM: Dense
tracking and mapping in real-time.” In Proc., Int. Conf. on Computer
Vision, 2320–2327. New York: IEEE.
Pinheiro, P. O. 2018. “Unsupervised domain adaptation with similarity learn-
ing.” In Proc., IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). New York: IEEE.
ROS (Robot Operating System). 2018a. “Robot operating system: ROS
documentation.” Accessed July 10, 2023. https://docs.ros.org/.
ROS (Robot Operating System). 2018b. “Running ROS across multiple
machines.” https://wiki.ros.org/ROS/Tutorials/MultipleMachines.
Rosten, E., and T. Drummond. 2005. “Fusing points and lines for high per-
formance tracking.” In Proc., 10th IEEE Int. Conf. on Computer Vision.
New York: IEEE.
Sarlin, P.-E., D. DeTone, T. Malisiewicz, and A. Rabinovich. 2020. “Super-
Glue: Learning feature matching with graph neural networks.” In Proc.,
IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
New York: IEEE.
Schmitt, M., M. Rous, A. Matsikis, and K.-F. Kraiss. 1999. “Vision-based
self-localization of a mobile robot using a virtual environment.” In Proc.,
1999 IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics & Automation. New York: IEEE.
Schubert, S., P. Neubert, S. Garg, M. Milford, and T. Fischer. 2023. “Visual
place recognition.” IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 2–16.
Szrek, J., P. Trybała, M. Goralczyk, A. Michalak, B. Ziętek, and R. Zimroz.
2021. “Accuracy evaluation of selected mobile inspection robot locali-
zation techniques in a GNSS-denied environment.” Sensors 21 (1): 141.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s21010141.
Tardos, J. D. 2021. “ORB-SLAM3.” Accessed September 23, 2023.
https://github.com/UZ-SLAMLab/ORB_SLAM3.
Tsintotas, K. A., L. Bampis, and A. Gasteratos. 2022. “The revisiting problem
in simultaneous localization and mapping: A survey onvisual loop closure
detection.” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 23 (11): 19929–19953.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2022.3175656.
Ulas, C., and T. Hakan. 2013. “A fast and robust feature-based scan-
matching method in 3D SLAM and the effect of sampling strategies.”
Int. J. Adv. Rob. Syst. 10 (11): 396. https://doi.org/10.5772/56964.
Ultralytics. 2024. “Ultralytics YOLOv8 docs.” Accessed August 20, 2024.
https://docs.ultralytics.com/.
Vanegas, F., K. J. Gaston, J. Roberts, and F. Gonzalez. 2019. “A framework
for UAV navigation and exploration in GPS-denied environments.” In
Proc., IEEE Aerospace Conf. New York: IEEE.
Wang, F., and Z. Zhao. 2017. “A survey of iterative closest point algorithm.”
In Proc., 2017 Chinese Automation Congress (CAC). New York: IEEE.
Wang, S., C. Rodgers, G. Zhai, T. N. Matiki, B. Welsh, A. Najafi, J. Wang,
Y. Narazaki, V. Hoskere, and B. F. Spencer Jr. 2022. “A graphics-based
digital twin framework for computer vision-based post-earthquake struc-
tural inspection and evaluation using unmanned aerial vehicles.” J. Infra-
struct. Intell. Resilience 1 (1): 100003. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iintel
.2022.100003.
Yao, G., A. Yilmaz, F. Meng, and L. Zhang. 2021. “Review of wide-
baseline stereo image matching based on deep learning.” Remote Sens.
13 (16): 3247. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs13163247.
Yue, Y., X. Wang, and Z. Zhan. 2023. “Single-point least square matching
embedded method for improving visual SLAM.” IEEE Sens. J. 23 (14):
16176–16188. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2023.3277487.
Zhang, G., and L.-T. Hsu. 2019. “A new path planning algorithm using a
GNSS localization error map for UAVs in an urban area.” J. Intell. Rob.
Syst. 94 (1): 219–235. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-018-0894-5.
Zhang, H., H. Xu, X. Tian, J. Jiang, and J. Ma. 2021a. “Image fusion meets
deep learning: A survey and perspective.” Inf. Fusion 76 (Dec): 323–336.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2021.06.008.
Zhang, J., Y. Yao, and B. Deng. 2021b. “Fast and robust iterative closest
point.” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 44 (7): 3450–3466.
Zhang, L., and X. Gao. 2022. “Transfer adaptation learning: A decade sur-
vey.” IEEE Trans. Neural Networks Learn. Syst. 35 (1): 23–44. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3183326.
Zhang, R., A. Ouyang, and Z. Li. 2022. “Automatic UAV inspection of tunnel
infrastructure in GPS-denied underground environment.” In Proc., European
Workshop on Structural Health Monitoring. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Zhou, F., L. Zhang, C. Deng, and X. Fan. 2021. “Improved point-line fea-
ture based visual SLAM method for complex environments.” Sensors
21 (13): 4604. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21134604.
© ASCE
04025123-18
J. Comput. Civ. Eng.
 J. Comput. Civ. Eng., 2026, 40(1): 04025123 
 Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by KIIT University on 09/17/26. 
Copyright ASCE; all rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence or similar technologies. 
=== END ===
