warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1286.pdf
sha256: EF10C0DA74D67CFE6A2533E67DD3F5098CEF67DA2C6F486374BAA876E1105648
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 31
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
remote sensing 
Article
Hybrid Camera Array-Based UAV Auto-Landing on
Moving UGV in GPS-Denied Environment
Tao Yang 1,2,*,†
, Qiang Ren 1,†
, Fangbing Zhang 1, Bolin Xie 1, Hailei Ren 3, Jing Li 3
and Yanning Zhang 1
1
SAIIP, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Xi’an 710071, China; renqiangnwpu@mail.npwu.edu.cn (Q.R.); fangbing_zhang@mail.nwpu.edu.cn (F.Z.);
11601716645@mail.npwu.edu.cn (B.X.); ynzhang@npu.edu.cn (Y.Z.)
2
Research & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen,
Shenzhen 518057, China
3
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China; hlren@stu.xidian.edu.cn
(H.R.); jinglixd@mail.xidian.edu.cn (J.L.)
*
Correspondence: tyang@nwpu.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-150-0291-9079
†
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received: 30 September 2018; Accepted: 15 November 2018; Published: 19 November 2018


Abstract: With the rapid development of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) systems, the autonomous
landing of a UAV on a moving Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV) has received extensive attention
as a key technology. At present, this technology is confronted with such problems as operating in
GPS-denied environments, a low accuracy of target location, the poor precision of the relative motion
estimation, delayed control responses, slow processing speeds, and poor stability. To address these
issues, we present a hybrid camera array-based autonomous landing UAV that can land on a moving
UGV in a GPS-denied environment. We ﬁrst built a UAV autonomous landing system with a hybrid
camera array comprising a ﬁsheye lens camera and a stereo camera. Then, we integrated a wide
Field of View (FOV) and depth imaging for locating the UGV accurately. In addition, we employed
a state estimation algorithm based on motion compensation for establishing the motion state of the
ground moving UGV, including its actual motion direction and speed. Thereafter, according to the
characteristics of the designed system, we derived a nonlinear controller based on the UGV motion
state to ensure that the UGV and UAV maintain the same motion state, which allows autonomous
landing. Finally, to evaluate the performance of the proposed system, we carried out a large number
of simulations in AirSim and conducted real-world experiments. Through the qualitative and
quantitative analyses of the experimental results, as well as the analysis of the time performance,
we veriﬁed that the autonomous landing performance of the system in the GPS-denied environment
is effective and robust.
Keywords: UAV autonomous landing; moving UGV; GPS-denied environment; hybrid camera array;
motion compensation
1. Introduction
The autonomous landing of an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) on an unmanned ground vehicle
(UGV) has been an active research ﬁeld over recent decades, as this technology is useful for various
purposes, such as delivery-by-drones, active following, ﬂight refueling, and so on. Many related
tasks, such as autonomous ﬂight and driving, visual navigation [1–3], obstacle avoidance [4],
and image-based visual serving [5,6], are being studied and designed to achieve autonomous landing.
At present, a growing number researchers are exploring autonomous landing technology on moving
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829; doi:10.3390/rs10111829
www.mdpi.com/journal/remotesensing
[p.2]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
2 of 31
UGVs. However, this technology faces many challenges, such as the locations of the target and the
UAV, the estimation of the target’s motion state, and the UAV control strategy.
Signiﬁcant improvements have been achieved in autonomous landing systems in recent years.
Most of these systems use vision navigation [7], motion-capture systems [8], the Global Positioning
System (GPS) [9], or an Inertial Navigation System (INS) [10] to estimate UAV status. An INS uses
inertial components, such as gyroscopes and accelerators, to obtain the location and speed of the UAV,
but INS often drifts in long-term ﬂight due to accumulated errors. GPS is widely used for the location of
UAVs by navigation satellites. However, because GPS relies entirely on satellites, it is easily disturbed in
complex urban or indoor environments, resulting in inaccurate positioning. Vision navigation estimates
the ﬂight state and relative position of the UAV by processing the image obtained by the vision sensor.
It is characterized by simple equipment, a large amount of information, complete autonomy, and strong
anti-interference performance. Therefore, the advantages of vision-based autonomous landing methods
in GPS-denied environments are particularly prominent. Figure 1 shows the proposed vision-based
autonomous landing system, including its vision sensors (Figure 1a), and an autonomous landing
example (Figure 1b).
(a) Hybrid Camera Array
(b) Autonomous Landing Example of the proposed system
Fisheye Lens
Camera
Stereo
Camera
Figure 1. UAV autonomous landing system based on a hybrid camera array. (a) Hybrid camera array,
including a ﬁsheye lens camera and a stereo camera; (b) An autonomous landing example using the
proposed system.
Most existing vision-based autonomous landing methods can be divided into two main classes:
landing on a static target and landing on a moving target. The vision sensors include visible and
infrared cameras [11,12]. A large body of literature focuses on the landing of a UAV on a static target,
such as a predeﬁned tag or runway. For example, Yang et al. [13] proposed an infrared camera
array guidance system to provide the real-time position and speed of ﬁxed-wing drones, and they
successfully landed the UAV on a runway in a GPS-denied environment. However, this method is not
suitable for use in a narrow landing area due to the limitation imposed by the complicated camera
array system setup on the ground. Kong et al. [14] designed a ground-based actuated infrared stereo
vision system. To expand the search FOV, they used a pan-tilt unit to actuate the vision system, which
can enhance the GPS-based localization in an unknown and GPS-denied environment. Nevertheless,
when there are high-temperature objects in the background, this method cannot precisely capture the
center of the target.
As for the autonomous landing of a UAV on a moving target, several studies have focused on
the collaboration between the ﬂying vehicle and the ground-based vehicle to coordinate the landing
[p.3]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
3 of 31
maneuver [15,16]. For instance, Davide et al. [7] presented a quadrotor system capable of autonomously
landing on a moving platform using only onboard sensing and computing. They exploited multi-sensor
fusion technology for localization, detection, motion estimation, and path planning for autonomous
navigation. These methods used the spatial information of the UGV to achieve autonomous landing
by path planning. Serra P et al. [5] proposed a novel method for landing the quadrotor on a moving
platform using image-based visual servo control. The control law also includes an estimator for
constant or slowly time-varying unknown inertial forces. These autonomous landing methods can
achieve impressive results, but some problems remain. On the one hand, most methods need special
markers to help locate a moving UGV, but marker-based detection methods [5,7,15,16] often lead to
target location failure when the image has motion blur or shadow changes, or if the target is small.
On the other hand, some methods [7,17,18] guide UAV ﬂight through path planning. With this path
planning method, it is easy to lose the target from the ﬁeld of view (FOV), causing landing failures.
To alleviate these problems, we propose a UAV autonomous landing method based on a hybrid
camera array. The vision sensor is a hybrid camera array, including a ﬁsheye lens camera and a stereo
camera. The contributions of this work are as follows:
•
First, we present a UAV autonomous landing system based on hybrid camera array in
a GPS-denied environment. The hybrid camera array is composed of a ﬁsheye lens camera
and a stereo camera. On the one hand, the system uses the wide FOV of the ﬁsheye lens camera
to expand the range of monitored scenes. On the other hand, it uses the stereo camera to acquire
depth to accurately estimate the altitude of the UAV. This information is very important for
positioning and estimating the motion of a moving UGV.
•
Second, our system fuses the ﬁsheye image and stereo depth image, and we propose a novel
state estimation algorithm to determine the motion state of the ground moving UGV. In this
method, a deep learning detection method and a tracking-by-detection algorithm are employed to
accurately locate the target in the ﬁsheye image. On this basis, we present a motion compensation
algorithm based on homography to calculate the target pixel displacement. Meanwhile, the stereo
depth image is used to estimate the ﬂight height and recover the true scale of the pixels. Also,
we designed a velocity observer that uses the aforementioned information to calculate the actual
motion direction and speed of the UGV.
•
Finally, we propose a nonlinear control strategy to achieve robust and precise control of the
UAV. After obtaining the motion analysis of the UGV, this method uses a two-stage proportion
integration differentiation (PID) controller and uses different designed parameters to control
the UAV’s ﬂight at different heights. In this way, the controller reaches the optimal control
effect and guides the UAV to autonomously land on the ground moving UGV accurately.
In addition, we conducted numerous simulations in AirSim and performed real experiments,
and we veriﬁed the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed algorithm through qualitative
and quantitative analyses.
Figure 2 shows the system architecture of our autonomous landing system. Speciﬁcally, in the
image acquisition module, the ﬁsheye image and depth image are acquired from the hybrid camera
array. Then, the ﬁsheye image is transmitted to the detection and location module. This module uses
the target detection and tracking algorithm to obtain the accurate location of the ground moving UGV.
Thereafter, the UGV position and depth images are transmitted to the UGV state estimation module.
For this module, we adopted a motion compensation algorithm to calculate the pixel displacement
of the UGV. Meanwhile, the depth image is used to estimate the ﬂight altitude and recover the true
scale of the pixels. These pieces of information are combined to estimate the motion state of the UGV.
Finally, the UGV state is transmitted to the nonlinear controller module, which generates control
instructions for the UAV in the world frame to control the ﬂight of the UAV. The system architecture
was implemented using the Robot Operating System (ROS), and the nodes transmit data through
ROS communication.
[p.4]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
4 of 31
FIIR Fisheye  Lens 
Camera
Detection,Tracking
Localization
MYNT-EYE
Stereo Camera
Nonlinear Controller
[Depth Map]
UGV State Estimation
World Frame Control
AutoPilot：Flight control   Jetson TX2 with ROS
Exit
[UGV Pixel Location]
[UGV Motion State]
[ UAV]
 [velocity]
[Flight Altitude]
[UAV-UGV Distance]
[stop]
[Fisheye Image]
[Correct Image]
Figure 2. The control architecture diagram of the proposed system. It shows the data transmission
from the hybrid camera array to the target location and state estimation, then to a nonlinear controller.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the hardware and
software of our landing system. Section 3 reports and analyzes the results of the simulation and real
experiments, respectively. In Section 4, we discuss the proposed method. Finally, we conclude the
paper in Section 5.
2. UAV-UGV Auto-Landing System
This section showcases our UAV-UGV autonomous landing system based on a hybrid camera
array; the system framework is shown in Figure 3. In our system, we used the computer vision toolbox
OpenCV, and the OpenCV library functions used include image acquisition, image correction, stereo
depth, and Kalman ﬁltering. As we can see, this system contains two main parts: the hybrid camera
array imaging module and the UAV autonomous landing algorithm module. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst built
the hybrid camera array imaging system to obtain the ﬁsheye images and depth images. The system
is composed of a ﬁsheye lens camera and a stereo camera. Thereafter, we developed a novel state
estimation algorithm for ground moving vehicles. In the development of this algorithm, determining
the means of locating the ground moving UGV in the ﬁsheye image with a wide FOV was our primary
task, which was accomplished by an end-to-end convolutional neural network (CNN) approach [19–21]
and tracking method. Then, we combined the target location with the depth information to estimate the
motion state of the UGV through motion compensation. The accuracy of the UGV motion estimation
directly affects the autonomous landing. Finally, we established a nonlinear control strategy to achieve
precise landing of the UAV. This method uses a two-stage PID controller, and we designed different
parameters that are used to control the UAV ﬂight at different heights.
2.1. Hybrid Camera Array Imaging System
For our vision-based UAV automatic landing system, one of the important steps was to construct
the hybrid optical imaging module. To better monitor and locate the UGV, our optical imaging module
is mainly composed of a ﬁsheye camera and a binocular stereo camera. Both cameras are ﬁxed under
the UAV with the lens facing down and the two cameras close to each other, as shown in the hybrid
camera array imaging module in Figure 3. Therefore, the two cameras are at the same altitude as the
UAV. The camera and lens parameters in our imaging system are shown in Table 1.
[p.5]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
5 of 31
UAV Autonomous Landing Module
Wide Fov Target Detection & Tracking
Frame Transformation
Two-stage PID control
Nonlinear Controller
Nonlinear UAV control 
Velocity Observer
 
UAV-UGV
 
tn
tm
tc
Gaussian Weighted
Motion Compensation
Sample 
Images
Features
In CNN
Region 
Proposal
Layer
Detection 
Result
Motion compensation
 
 Feature Map
 
 Homography
Tracking-by-Detection
Detection & Tracking
 
YOLO-V3 
 
Data Assocation
Velocity Observer
 
Stereo Depth
 
Gaussian Weighted
 
Motion Estimation
 
Hybird Camera Array Imaging Module
Stereo 
Vision
Distortion
 correction
K,D
K,D,R,T
Fisheye Image Correction 
Stereo Depth  Estimation
Fisheye Image
Binocular
Stereo Image
Fisheye Image Correct
 
Camera Calibration
 
Distortion Correct
Stereo Depth  Estimation
 
Stereo Calibration
 
Stereo Rectification
 
Stereo Matching
Figure 3. An overview of our landing system. This system contains two main parts: a hybrid camera
array imaging module and a UAV autonomous landing algorithm module.The ﬁrst part shows imaging
using a ﬁsheye lens camera and a stereo camera, which were employed to build our imaging system.
In the second part, our UAV autonomous landing algorithm is presented, including a novel UGV state
estimation algorithm and the design of the nonlinear controller in the system. Among them, the UGV
state estimation algorithm performs detection and tracking, motion compensation, and the velocity
observer function.
Table 1. The camera and lens parameters.
Camera/Lens
Speciﬁcation
Parameter
Sensor
CMV4000-3E12
Resolution
512 × 512 pixels
Frame rate
90 fps
Interface
USB 3.0
Power consumption
4.5 W
Infrared Camera
Operating temperature
−20 ◦C to ∼50 ◦C
Focal length
3.5 mm
Angle of View
150◦
Magniﬁcation
0.3
TV distortion
−0.027%
Kowa LM4NCL
Compatible sensor
1.1
Focal length
2.1 mm
Resolution
752 × 480
Base line
120.0 mm
Frame rate
60 fps
Interface
USB 3.0
Power consumption
3.50 W
MYNT EYE S1030-IR
Operating temperature
−10 ◦C to ∼40 ◦C
In the hybrid camera array, the ﬁsheye camera has a wider ﬁeld of view than traditional cameras
and was selected as the target search sensor for this system. The binocular stereo camera mainly
serves to measure the depth and obtain the ﬂight altitude. In our system, we chose the combination
of the Point Grey GS3-U3-41C6NIR-C infrared camera and the Kowa LM4NCL ﬁsheye lens as our
ﬁsheye camera. Compared with visible cameras, an infrared camera has wider bands, stronger target
[p.6]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
6 of 31
perception, and the ability to work around the clock. The frame rate of the camera can reach 90 fps at
a 512 × 512 resolution, and it has an FOV of 150◦. The maximum magniﬁcation of the camera lens is
0.3, and its TV distortion is −0.027%. We chose the MYNT EYE S1010-IR binocular stereo camera with
a built-in (IR) active photodetector, which slightly enhances the positioning accuracy in white wall and
low-textured backgrounds. The effective altitude estimation range of this binocular camera is about
0.7–8 m.
When the imaging system is running, the two cameras are individually calibrated and work
independently. In this work, we exploited Zhang’s calibration method [22], using homography
from a calibration plane to image the plane, to calibrate the ﬁsheye camera and calculate the
internal parameters K f isheye( f f isheye, cx, cy) and distortion coefﬁcient Df isheye(k1, k2). Also, the internal
parameters are used to correct the ﬁsheye distortion [23,24]. Meanwhile, the binocular stereo camera
was also calibrated with Zhang’s calibration method to obtain the camera’s internal parameters
Kstereo( fstereo, cx, cy), distortion coefﬁcient Dstereo(k1, k2), and the external parameters (Rstereo, Tstereo).
Rstereo and Tstereo denote the rotation matrix and translation matrix between the left and right camera,
respectively, and bundle adjustment was adopted to optimize the two parameters. Then, we used
fstereo, cx, cy, k1, and k2 to correct the left and right images, and used R and T to calculate the pixel
depth through the triangulation principle.
2.2. UGV State Estimation
After the hybrid camera array imaging system obtains the ﬁsheye images and depth images,
useful information must be extracted from these images to facilitate the drone’s autonomous landing,
as shown in the UAV autonomous landing algorithm module in Figure 3. In this part, the target is ﬁrst
detected and tracked from the ﬁsheye image to obtain the UGV location. On this basis, the corrected
ﬁsheye image is used for target motion compensation and for the calculation of pixel displacement.
Meanwhile, the stereo depth image is used to estimate the ﬂight height and to recover the true scale of
the pixels. We designed a velocity observer that uses this information to calculate the actual motion
state of the UGV.
2.2.1. Wide FOV Detection and Tracking
The ground moving UGV’s location [25,26] is one of the key challenges in autonomous landing.
In this system, we set an ArUco marker on the surface of the UGV for determining the location of
the moving UGV by using ﬁsheye image. The marker is generally composed of black and white,
with certain coding rules, and have strong visual characteristics. What is more, it has a large difference
from the background of the scene and hardly is repeated. Because some information at the edge of the
image will be lost when the ﬁsheye image is corrected, the locating effect of the target in the image will
be affected. Therefore, the UGV is directly detected and tracked in the original images with a wide
FOV. These images always have very severe distortions, so the performance of the traditional marker
detection method will be greatly reduced.
In this system, we chose the deep learning approach [27] YOLOv3 [28] to detect the moving UGV
using a marker. This method works well when the target scale changes or if the illumination changes
obviously. The detection results under these challenging scenarios are shown in Figure 4. However,
false alarms may occur during target detection, which can result in the system choosing the wrong
landing platform and fail to land. Therefore, the detection results are taken as the input, and the data
association method is used [29–33] to obtain target tracking trajectories. Such a tracking algorithm can
eliminate false alarms from the detection results and improve the locating performance of the target in
the system.
[p.7]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
7 of 31
Input fisheye image
Detection Result
Motion Blur
Large Distortion
Small Object
Figure 4. Target detection results in some challenging scenarios. The top and bottom rows represent
the input image and detection results, respectively, under a large distortion, motion blur conditions,
and small object conditions.
Target Detection: In terms of target detection, we adopted YOLOv3, which is an end-to-end
regressive neural network, to detect the target directly from ﬁsheye images. The code for YOLOv3
comes from its ofﬁcial website, including the CPU version and the GPU version. In its GPU version,
the algorithm uses a large number of CUDA libraries and uses CUDNN to accelerate. In our system,
we used the GPU version of YOLOv3 on TX2 to detect the target, which speeds up the algorithm based
on guaranteeing the detection rate.
Inspired by Faster R-CNN [34] region proposal networks, this method adopts a region proposal
layer to predict the bounding boxes. The network uses features from the entire image to predict the
ﬁnal detection bounding boxes. For each bounding box, a conﬁdence score is computed as follows:
con f idence = Pugv × IOUtruth
pred ,
(1)
where Pugv denotes whether a UGV appears in the predicted box, and IOUtruth
pred denotes the intersection
of the union (IOU) between the predicted box and the ground truth. The network predicts ﬁve
parameters for each bounding box: x, y, w, h, and con f idence, where (x, y) is the object’s center point,
w and h represent the predicted width and height, respectively, and con f idence represents the predicted
IOU value. The IOU measure is described as:
IOU(oi, oj) = Area(oi) T Area(oj)
Area(oi) S Area(oj),
(2)
where Area(oi) and Area(oj) are both bounding boxes for objects oi and oj.
After the ﬁnal prediction step, a series of bounding boxes are obtained with a certain conﬁdence.
Furthermore, non-maximum suppression (NMS) [35] is used to select the ﬁnal detection from multiple
overlapping candidate proposals.
[p.8]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
8 of 31
Target Tracking: For target tracking based on data association, we constructed a Hungarian data
association matrix with the IOU value and the appearance model of the target, and we assigned targets
by solving the Hungarian matrix. We deﬁned two similar values that are fast-to-compute similarity
measures. These measures are all in the range [0, 1], which facilitates combinations of these measures.
For each object, the IOU value is obtained for all the other targets. To determine which target
IOUs are similar, the following is computed:
sIOU(oi, oj) = 1 −IOU(oi, oj),
(3)
For each region, we obtain one-dimensional color histograms and each color channel using
25 bins, which was found to work well. The color histogram is deﬁned by ci = {c1
i , c2
i , ..., cn
i }
for each object oi with the dimensionality n = 75 when three color channels are used. The color
histograms are normalized using the L1 norm. The similarity between them is measured using the
histogram intersection:
scolour(oi, oj) = 1 −
n
∑
n=1
min(ck
i , ck
j ),
(4)
In this paper, the ﬁnal Hungarian solved matrix is a combination of the above equations:
s(oi, oj) = a1sdistance(oi, oj) + a2scolour(oi, oj),
(5)
where a1 and a2 represent the normalization factors, and a1 + a2 = 1. In the experiment, a1 = a2 = 0.5.
The matching matrix between them is given by:
Dt+1
t
=


s(ot
1, ot+1
1
)
s(ot
1, ot+1
2
)
· · ·
s(ot
1, ot+1
q
)
s(ot
2, ot+1
1
)
s(ot
2, ot+1
2
)
· · ·
s(ot
2, ot+1
q
)
...
...
...
...
s(ot
p, ot+1
1
)
s(ot
p, ot+1
2
)
· · ·
s(ot
p, ot+1
q
)


,
(6)
where p and q represent the number of targets detected in the two consecutive frames, respectively.
The Hungarian algorithm is used to get the target tracking results from Dj
i.
In addition, we added a Kalman ﬁltering [36,37] algorithm to this tracking algorithm to predict
the target position, which can improve the tracking performance and target location accuracy of
the system.
2.2.2. Motion Compensation
After obtaining the location of the ground moving UGV, we can calculate the moving distance of
the UGV and perform motion analysis. However, since the onboard camera moves with the drone,
the pixel difference between the two frames is not the actual moving distance of the UGV. To solve
this problem, the homography model of the image plane was exploited for motion compensation.
Because the original ﬁsheye image does not satisfy the pinhole imaging model, the corrected image is
used for feature point matching.
First, we adopted the SIFT-GPU algorithm to get the SIFT [38] matching points of the two images.
This algorithm can improve the matching speed greatly by using CUDA libraries under the premise
of ensuring the correct matching results. The feature matching is shown in Figure 5. Then, we can
calculate the homography matrix H of the two images with RANSAC. On this basis, H is used to map
the UGV location of the previous frame to the current frame. Finally, the Euclidean distance is used to
determine the pixel moving distance of the UGV. Deﬁning pi = {ui, vi, wi} and pj = {uj, vj, wj} as the
[p.9]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
9 of 31
location of the detected UGV in the previous frame and the current frame, the mapping equation is
deﬁned as follows:


x′
i
y′
i
w′
i

= H


ui
vi
wi


=


a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33




ui
vi
wi

,
(7)
where (x′
i, y′
i, w′
i) is the transformed coordinate. In the actual process, we need to apply normalization.
The new coordinate p
′
i = (xi, yi) is given by:
xi = x′
i/w′
i
(8)
yi = y′
i/w′
i
(9)
Similarly, by normalization, the coordinates of the UGV in the current frame are deﬁned by
p
′
j = (xj, yj). The pixel displacement is deﬁned as:
fpd(p
′
i, p
′
j) =
q
(xi −xj)2 + (yi −yj)2,
(10)
ugv
o
ugv
S
Depth Map
H
Velocity Observer
 
Motion Compensation
Correction
Detection   Tracking
Figure 5. An illustration of the proposed UGV state estimation method. It includes three parts: detection
and tracking, motion compensation, and velocity observer. The yellow and green lines in the velocity
observer represent the UGV’s actual movement and the distance between the UAV and UGV, respectively.
[p.10]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
10 of 31
2.2.3. Velocity Observer
In the previous part, we obtained the pixel displacement of the target. To estimate the motion
state of the UGV—that is, to calculate its velocity and orientation—we need to recover the true scale of
the pixels of the ﬁsheye image and to calculate the actual moving distance of the UGV over a period of
time. For this, stereo depth is used to ﬁrst estimate the ﬂight altitude of the UGV. Because the lens of
the stereo camera faces down, the depth value of the ground represents the ﬂight altitude of the UAV.
We designed a velocity observer to recover the true scale of the pixels and to calculate the motion state
of the UGV.
Stereo Depth-based Flight Altitude Estimation: In this system, the stereo camera is used to
calculate the distance between the UAV and the ground by triangulation. To accurately acquire the
depth of a point in three-dimensional space, stereo matching is ﬁrst done. There are many existing
stereo matching algorithms, such as local BM [39], global SGBM [40,41], etc. The common problem in
these algorithms is that it takes a very long time to obtain a good depth map. We adopted the disparity
map, which has the hardware acceleration provided by the MYNT EYE camera SDK. According to the
principle of triangulation, the depth Z(i, j) is deﬁned as:
Z(i, j) = fstereo × Tx
d(i, j)
,
(11)
where (i, j) is the pixel coordinate, fstereo is the focal length of the stereo camera, d(i, j) represents the
disparity in (i, j), and Tx is the baseline of the stereo camera. Then, the average depth of the [M, N]
area located at the center point of the depth image is selected as the depth of the ground, and the ﬂight
altitude Z of the UAV is determined, deﬁned as:
Z =
1
R × R
∑
(i,j)∈[M,N]
Z(i, j),
(12)
The precision of the stereo depth estimation is critical for the state estimation of the UGV in this
autonomous landing system. Due to the vibration of the UAV during ﬂight, the altitude Z obtained
may contain noise. We applied the Kalman ﬁlter to obtain a more accurate altitude. The Kalman space
state equation is given by:
xk = Axk−1 + ωk
(13)
zk = Hxk−1 + νk
(14)
where xk = [dk, ∆dk]T is a state vector, dk is the predicted depth value, and ∆dk is the predicted depth
change. A = [1, 1; 0, 1] represents the state transition matrix, zk = [Z, ∆Z]T is the measurement vector,
Z is the measured altitude value, and ∆Z is the change in the measured altitude. H = [1, 0; 0, 1] is the
measurement matrix, and ωk and νk are both white Gaussian noise and are subject to N(0, ξ).
Velocity Observer:
After obtaining the ﬂight altitude Z, we designed a velocity observer to
estimate the moving velocity and direction of the UGV. The ﬁsheye camera is at the same altitude as
the UAV, so when estimating the motion state of the ground moving UGV, we directly use this altitude
Z and target pixel displacement fpd to calculate the actual displacement sugv of the UGV through the
pinhole imaging model. The formula is as follows:
sugv =
fpd × Z
f f isheye
,
(15)
where f f isheye is the focal length of the stereo camera, and Z represents the UAV ﬂight altitude.
[p.11]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
11 of 31
Thereafter, the UGV motion state of the current frame can be estimated, including its velocity and
direction. Since we know the time difference ∆t between two frames, then the instant velocity v∆t and
orientation v∆t of the UGV are as follows:
v∆t = sugv/∆t
(16)
o∆t = atan((xj −xi)/(yj −yi))
(17)
However, because the time between two consecutive frames is too short, the calculated
instantaneous state is not stable, including v∆t and o∆t. Therefore, our strategy is to record the
instant motion state of the UGV and use the Gaussian weighting method to calculate the average speed
and direction over a period of time as the UGV motion state of the current frame.
In this case, we applied the one-dimensional Gaussian distribution to weight and sum the velocity
and orientation at different times, and the peak of this distribution is selected as the weight of the
current frame, as shown in Figure 3. The Gaussian function is w(x) = 1/σ
√
2πe−x2/2σ2; that is,
N ∼(0, σ2), where the mean value is equal to 0, and σ is the variance of x. The weighted results are
as follows:
vugv =
n
∑
i=m
w(i) ∗v∆t
i
(18)
ougv =
n
∑
i=m
w(i) ∗o∆t
i
(19)
where m and n are the values of the Gaussian weight corresponding to the start time and the end
time, respectively.
The obtained vugv and ougv are used to orthogonally decompose the velocity into X and Y
directions of the UAV’s body frame, resulting in vx
ugv and vy
ugv, respectively. In accordance with
the above motion state estimation process, the precise velocity results of the ground moving vehicle
can be obtained. An illustration of the proposed UGV state estimation method is shown in Figure 5.
2.3. Nonlinear Controller
In this section, we present the derivation of a nonlinear controller using PID [42,43] to precisely
guide the UAV for autonomous landing. Please note that the height of the UAV can be controlled
separately. Therefore, after estimating the motion state of the UGV, we mainly focus on the UAV’s
horizontal pursuit of the UGV.
Frame Transformation: For controlling the UAV’s ﬂight, we chose to calculate and set up the speed
of the UAV in the world coordinate system. Therefore, it is necessary to determine the speed of the UGV
in the world coordinate system. We ﬁrst describe the transformation between the world coordinate
system and the human body coordinate system. The world frame we used is North East Down (NED),
which means that the three directions (north, east, and down) are all positive. Both coordinate systems
follow the Right-Hand Rule. The relationship is shown in Figure 6, and the conversion formula is:


Xw
Yw
Zw
1


=


r11
r12
r13
t1
r21
r22
r23
t2
r31
r32
r33
t3
0
0
0
1




Xb
Yb
Zb
1


=
"
R
T
0
1
#


Xb
Yb
Zb
1


(20)
[p.12]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
12 of 31







































r11 = 1 −2q2
2 −2q2
3
r12 = 2(q1q2 + q0q3)
r13 = 2(q1q3 −q0q2)
r21 = 2(q1q2 −q0q3)
r22 = 1 −2q2
1 −2q2
3
r23 = 2(q2q3 + q0q1)
r31 = 2(q1q3 + q0q2)
r32 = 2(q2q3 −q0q1)
r33 = 1 −2q2
1 −2q2
2
(21)
where [Xw, Yw, Zw, 1]T and [Xb, Yb, Zb, 1]T are coordinates of the UGV in the body frame and world
frame, respectively. (q0, q1, q2, q3) is a quaternion, R is a 3 × 3 rotation matrix, and T is a 3 × 1
translation matrix.
Zb
Xb
Yb
Body Frame
Yb
Xb
Onboard Viewpoint
R,T
Xw(North)
Zw(Down)
Yw(East)
World Frame
Figure 6. The transformation between the World Frame (Xw, Yw, Zw) and the Body Frame (Xb, Yb, Zb).
In this system, the world frame is North East Down (NED).
The UGV speed is obtained after the coordinate transformation. The velocity is an instantaneous
variable, so there is no translation between the body frame and the world frame: only the rotation is
required. The conversion formula is deﬁned as follows:
Vw = RVb
(22)
In this formula, Vw and Vb are the calculated velocity of the UGV in the body frame and the
world frame, respectively.
Two-stage PID control: When deriving the nonlinear controller, considering that the UAV movements
are heavily inﬂuenced by nonlinear factors and dynamic coupling, a PID controller was proposed for
this system to control the UAV stability in terms of following and landing on the ground moving UGV.
More speciﬁcally, after obtaining Vw, this system adopts a closed-loop PID control system, which uses
[p.13]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
13 of 31
the output of the controller and sends it back to affect the controller’s input. The desired continuous
PID control is deﬁned as follows:
vctrl = Kp[e(t) + 1
Ti
R t
0 dt + Td
de(t)
dt ]
(23)
where vctrl is the ﬁnal control velocity, Kp is the proportional coefﬁcient, Ti is the integral time constant,
Td is the differential time constant, and e(t) is the system error.
In our real application, the discrete PID control method is typically used. The formula is as follows:
vctrl = Kpe(k) + KpT
Ti
k
∑
n=0
e(n) + KpTd
T
(e(k) −e(k −1))
= Kpe(k) + Ki
k
∑
n=0
e(n) + Kd(e(k) −e(k −1))
(24)
e(k) = S
(25)
where Kp is a proportional coefﬁcient, Ki is an integral coefﬁcient, Kd is a differential coefﬁcient,
and e(k) is the system error, which is the relative distance between the UAV and UGV. The calculation
of this value is similar to the process of UGV motion analysis.
Moreover, for this system, we designed a two-stage PID controller and set different PID parameters
for different ﬂight altitudes to achieve accurate control of the UAV. The designed PID parameters for
our simulation landing system and real landing system are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. The PID control parameters.
Experiments
Height (m)
Kp
Ki
Kd
Simulation
≥4
0.80
0.00
0.35
<4
1.50
0.00
0.50
Real-World (DJI)
≥3
0.50
0.00
0.20
<3
0.70
0.00
0.25
The idea behind designing the PID parameters is as follows. Proportional coefﬁcient Kp. When the
integral coefﬁcient and the proportional coefﬁcient are both zero, the UAV control state becomes a
linear equation. At this time, we set the proportional coefﬁcient to 0.5, which means that the UAV
control velocity is 0.5 m/s when the horizontal displacement between the UAV and UAV is 1 m. In the
actual experiment, we adjusted the parameters based on this value. When the parameter is too large
or too small, it causes a failure in landing. Integral coefﬁcient Ki. The purpose of the integral term is
to ensure that the system eliminates the steady-state error, but our autonomous landing process is
dynamic and there is no steady state, so we set this value to zero. Differential coefﬁcient Kd. Here,
we used the differential term to predict the trend in the actual value and adjust the size of the control
value to avoid oscillation. In practice, we started to adjust this value at around 0.1. In our simulation
experiment, when the altitude of the drone is larger than 4 m, the values of the proportional coefﬁcient,
integral coefﬁcient, and differential coefﬁcient are 0.80, 0, 0.35, else they are 1.5, 0, 0.50, respectively.
The height value 4 m was set according to experience.
In addition, to accurately control the PID gain values, the PID control velocity in the Xw and
Yw directions was designed separately. According to the body frame of the UAV, the PID resultant
velocity is decomposed into Xw and Yw directions, represented by vx
ctrl and vy
ctrl. Then, the UAV can
be independently controlled using the decomposition velocity. As is known through the PID control
parameter, the PID gain values are enough to control the UAV to complete autonomous landing.
After that, when instructing the UAV to change its direction of ﬂight, we only move the UAV in the
[p.14]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
14 of 31
Xw and Yw directions for motion on the horizontal plane. To keep the UAV and the UGV in the same
movement state in the horizontal plane, the ﬁnal velocity of the UAV is given by:
vx
uav = vx
ugv + vx
ctrl
(26)
vy
uav = vy
ugv + vy
ctrl
(27)
where vx
uav and vy
uav are the ultimate control velocity of the UAV in the Xw and Yw directions, respectively.
As for the control of the UAV landing process, when the detected UGV is in the center of the UAV
downward-looking image, the system instructs the UAV to start approaching the UGV. If the distance
between them is less than a certain value, the UAV will land directly.
3. Experiments
To evaluate the performance of the hybrid camera array-based autonomous landing system,
we conducted a large number of experiments, including simulation experiments and real experiments,
which are described in this section. In the simulation experiments, to improve authenticity, both the
simulation environment and the simulation system were very close to the scenario in the real
experiment. We describe how this simulation platform was built in the following. In addition,
we performed quantitative and qualitative analyses of the experimental results and evaluated the
autonomous landing performance. In the real experiments, we built a real experimental platform
to further test the system performance; it is described in Section 3.2.1. In addition, aiming to assess
the performance of the UAV autonomous landing system, we applied the proposed method to target
detection tasks and real-time autonomous landing tasks.
It should be noted that the effective altitude estimation range of this binocular camera is about
0.7–8 m. When the UAV’s ﬂight altitude is greater than the effective range, the depth estimate
will be inaccurate. Therefore, we need to roughly control the UAV landing within the effective
altitude range based on the UGV position. Aiming for an accurate landing process, we set an initial
altitude IH for the UAV to land accurately. This autonomous landing mainly consists of two processes:
(1) The following and approaching process of the UAV. First, the UAV needs to ﬂy to the initial altitude
IH for landing accurately. When the UAV reaches the initial altitude, its autonomous landing process
begins. (2) The ﬁnal landing process of the UAV. We set a limited altitude LH at which to turn on the
ﬁnal landing mode. When the UAV reaches the set altitude LH, it sends a landing command. At this
point, the UAV directly lands vertically and completes the landing without any procedural control.
3.1. Simulation in AirSim
3.1.1. Simulation Platform
In the simulation experiments, to improve authenticity, we ﬁrst chose AirSim [44] as our
simulation platform. It is an unreal Engine-based simulation tool for UAV ﬂight released by Microsoft.
With this tool, we can simulate the ﬂight of the UAV and collect data under the unreal engine.
It provides us with various visual data, such as RGB images, depth maps, disparity maps, and color
segmentation maps. These can be acquired for all directions of the UAV. Moreover, the simulation
environment provided by AirSim is very close to the real environment, as shown in Figure 7a. The
straight-line road was selected as the landing zone. We can set up various complex environments in
this platform to simulate various challenges encountered by the autonomous landing system in an
actual scenario, which can assist the real outdoor ﬂight experiment.
[p.15]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
15 of 31
s 
Autonomous Landing Simulation  Environment
(a)
Depth Image
UGV
UAV
Input Image
 
Client
Server
Ethernet crossover cable
(b)
s
H: 2.65 m
X: -0.10 m
Y: 0.03 m
Client
Server
H:2.93 m
X:0.01 m
Y:0.00 m
(c)
NVIDIA Jetson TX2
Figure 7. Our simulation environment based on Microsoft AirSim. (a) A screenshot of our test environment;
(b) The running simulation environment and the requiring physical equipment; (c) A schematic diagram
of the autonomous landing of the UAV in our simulation environment.
[p.16]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
16 of 31
The system we built is the same as that used in the real experiment. We used a server to build
the simulation environment to simulate the image input and instruction execution of the system
in real experiments. In this simulation environment, we added a UAV and a ground moving UGV
and attached an ArUco marker to the surface of the UGV to increase its identiﬁability, as shown in
Figure 7a. Furthermore, we selected RGB images and depth maps as the inputs to the simulation
system according to the hybrid camera array equipped with our system. Since high image resolution
results in the AirSim’s image frame rate being too low to meet experimental requirements, we set the
image resolution to 640 × 480. In addition, we used Jeston TX2 (client) as a processor to implement this
algorithm and get UAV’s ﬂight instructions. The client and server communicate with each other by RPC
communication, the running simulation environment, and the required physical equipment (i.e., client,
Jetson TX2, Ethernet crossover cable), as shown in Figure 7b. Please note that the frame rate provided
by AirSim environment is 3–5 in NVIDIA Jetson TX2. Therefore, we set the velocity of the UGV to
0.2–0.8 m/s in the simulation experiment to ensure that the experiment was performed normally.
3.1.2. Simulation Results
On the constructed simulation platform, we designed several different trajectories of the UGV
to test the performance of our system. The speciﬁc experimental process is as follows. The UAV
takes off from the ground and explores a designated location; the ground simulation UGV moves
at a varying velocity along a ﬁxed route we set, and its initial altitude IH is 7.5 m. The onboard
processor continuously detects and analyzes the motion state of the ground UGV, thereby commanding
the UAV to follow the UGV. Once the moving UGV is at the center of the UAV’s view, the UAV
gradually approaches the ground moving UGV. When the height difference between the two is less
than LH = 1.5 m, the ground moving UGV has completely ﬂooded the view ﬁeld of the drone and,
at this time, the drone enters landing mode. Figure 7c shows a schematic diagram of autonomous
landing in the simulation environment.
In our experiment, to test the performance of our system, we ran autonomous landing experiments
along different paths (i.e., straight line, S-shape, rectangle, circle, ﬁgure-of-eight, etc.). Moreover,
we chose one of the trajectories for quantitative analysis, and the experimental results are shown in
Figures 8 and 9. For the quantitative analysis, the simulation platform provided us with the true value
of the spatial position of the UAV and the UGV, and the performance of the algorithm was evaluated
by comparing the simulation data with the ground truth provided by the simulation environment.
It should be noted that the ground truth values are difﬁcult to obtain in real experimental environments
and often require expensive measurement equipment.
The results of the quantitative analysis simulation are visualized in Figure 8. Figure 8a shows the
3D trajectory of the vehicles during the process of autonomous landing. These three colors represent
the UAV ground truth trajectory, the UGV ground truth trajectory, and the UGV estimated trajectory,
respectively. From the curve in the ﬁgure, we can see that during the whole process of autonomous
landing, the UAV continuously follows and gradually approaches the ground moving UGV. Figure 8b
shows a comparison of the target localization result with the ground truth value. We can see that the
localization results of our system are very close to the ground truth value, and as the distance between
them decreases, the localization accuracy increases. Moreover, the localization errors in the X, Y, and Z
directions are in ranges of −0.5 to 0.5 (m), −0.5 to 0.5 (m), and 0.2 to 1.2 (m), and are ﬁnally stable at
0.01 m, 0.01 m, and 0.08 m, respectively, which means that the localization results have achieved a high
accuracy. Figure 8c reports a comparison between the instantaneous velocity and the ground truth
value. The three colors indicate UGV Estimated, UGV Ground Truth, and UAV Desired, respectively.
From this ﬁgure, we can see that the velocity curve measured by our velocity observer coincides highly
with the ground truth curve and, ﬁnally, the UAV and the UGV velocities are consistent and maintain
the same motion state.
[p.17]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
17 of 31
Frame Number
(b) Localization results and errors
3D Position
XL  (m)
YL   (m)  
Frame Number
Frame Number
Frame Number
Frame Number
Frame Number
Frame Number
Frame Number
ZL   (m)  
Xe(m)   
Ye(m)   
Ze(m)   
XL(m)   
YL(m)   
ZL(m)   
VX (m/s)   
VY (m/s)   
(c) Velocity in X and Y directions
(a)UAV and UGV 3D trajectories
Top view 
Starting point of UAV trajectory
Ending point of UAV trajectory
Figure 8. The results of the quantitative analysis simulation. (a) UAV and UGV 3D trajectories;
(b) The localization results and errors in the X, Y, and Z coordinates; (c) The velocities of the UGV in
both X and Y directions. In the ﬁgure, XL, YL, and ZL respectively represent the localization in the X, Y,
and Z directions; Xe, Ye, and Ze represent the localization errors in the X, Y, and Z directions; VX, VY
represent the velocity in the X, Y directions.
[p.18]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
18 of 31
Y-Position (m)
X-Position  (m)
Z-Position (m)
Y-Position (m)
Z-Position (m)
Top View
Top View
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
(f)
X-Position (m)
Top View
Z-Position(m)
Y-Position (m)
X-Position (m)
(e)
X-Position (m)
Y-Position (m)
Z-Position (m)
Top View
X-Position (m)
Y-Position (m)
Z-Position(m)
Side  View
X-Position (m)
Z-Position(m)
Y-Position (m)
Side View
Starting point of UAV trajectory
Ending point of UAV trajectory
Figure 9. The experimental results of several kinds of 3D trajectories, such as ﬁgure-of-eight, circle,
S-shape, rectangle, straight line, etc. (a–c) The movement direction of the UGV is constantly changing
in both the X and Y directions; (d,e) The movement direction of the UGV is changing in the X or Y
direction; (f) Maintaining forward movement.
Figure 9 represents the trajectory of the UAV and UGV in six complex conditions. From Figure 9f,
we can see that when the UGV goes straight, the drone glides very smoothly to a position close to
the UGV. In Figure 9d,e, the moving direction of the UGV is changed by 90 degrees and 180 degrees,
respectively. Even in this more complex condition, the trajectory curves of the UAV and UGV are
still very coincident. In Figure 9a–c, although the motion state of the UGV is constantly changing,
the trajectory of the drone can still coincide with the UGV trajectory after a period of time. In summary,
we found that even if the UGV trajectory is complex and varied, our system still works well.
3.2. Real-World Experiments
3.2.1. Experimental Platform
To validate the effectiveness of our autonomous landing system in the real world, we built
an autonomous landing platform. The experimental platform includes the DJI-MATRICE 100 as
the UAV, equipped with an onboard Jetson TX2, a ﬁsheye lens camera and binocular stereo camera,
and a remote-control vehicle as the UGV, which is controlled manually (shown in the Figure 10).
[p.19]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
19 of 31
USB 3.0
Jeston TX2
Stereo 
Camera
UGV
DJI M100
NVIDIA Jetson TX2
MYNT EYE 
S1010-IR
Fisheye Lens 
Camera
Binocular Stereo 
Camera
GS3-U3-41C6NIR-C
Fisheye camera
 Stereo Camera
USB-UART
Fisheye Lens 
Camera
Figure 10. The autonomous landing system settings used in our experiments, including DJI-MATRICE,
Jetson TX2, the ﬁsheye lens camera and binocular stereo camera, and the remote-control vehicle.
Both the ﬁsheye lens camera and the binocular stereo camera are ﬁxed to the body of the
UAV without using a camera pan/tilt. The ﬁrst one is tilted down by 90◦for wide FOV target
seeking, providing an image resolution of 512 × 512 pixels; the second binocular stereo camera is also
downward-looking to locate the moving UGV, and the resolution is 752 × 480 pixels. For the ground
vehicle, in nominal conditions, the platform can reach a maximum speed of 3 m/s. We installed
a 1.0 × 1.0 m PVC landing pad on top of the vehicle, reducing its maximum speed to approximately
1.5 m/s for operation safety. The software modules of the system (i.e., target detection and tracking,
feature matching, motion state estimation, nonlinear control) are implemented on the ROS platform
and run in real time. All sensors we set up were in the payload of the UAV.
3.2.2. Wide FOV Detection and Tracking Experiments
To improve the stability and robustness of the autonomous landing system, we needed to improve
the detection rate of the moving UGV and effectively remove the false alarms. In our system, there are
two main ways to eliminate false alarms. In the network prediction process of YOLOv3, false targets
can be removed by conﬁdence through a period of observation; in the process of target tracking,
false targets can be removed by judging whether the target appears continuously or not.
Since the deep network heavily depends on the characteristics of the input images, for this system,
we built a training dataset UGV_Train_Data with environmental diversity to train the YOLOv3
network models. The training dataset UGV_Train_Data contains 102,003 pictures, including the
11,334 real captured images and more than 90,000 composite images of complex scenes. Among them,
the real captured images include 7680 near-infrared ﬁsheye images and 3654 grayscale images.
The composite images consist of 40,669 images superimposed with a marker on the public dataset
coco_2017_test, and 50,000 images superimposed with a marker on our own complex aerial dataset.
Some images in our training dataset are shown in Figure 11.
[p.20]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
20 of 31
Aerial Data
 
 
 
Coco Data
 
Real Data
Figure 11. Some images in our training dataset, including the real captured images and the composite
images of complex scenes. Among them, the original images include near-infrared ﬁsheye images
captured by the Point Grey camera and grayscale images; the composite images include the Coco Test
2017 dataset and our own complex aerial dataset.
The training data were labeled with the tool of LabelImg [45]. During training, we used a batch
size of 64, max batches of 60,000, a momentum of 0.9, and a decay of 0.0005. The learning rate was
set at 0.0001. In each convolutional layer, we implemented a batch normalization disposal, except in
the ﬁnal layer, before the feature map. In addition, we built a test dataset UGV_test_Data to evaluate
the detection performance. The UGV_test_Data contains ﬁve autonomous landing experimental
scenarios with over 5000 images. We quantitatively assessed our detection performance on our dataset
UGV_test_Data, and the experimental results are shown in Table 3.
[p.21]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
21 of 31
As can be seen from Table 3, the detection algorithm YOLOv3 achieved great performance in these
scenarios. The average values of P, R, and F1 are higher than 99%. Although there are some false alarms,
we can use the tracking algorithm to further enhance the target locating performance. To illustrate the
effectiveness of UGV locating by the system, we carried out detection and tracking experiments on our
dataset UGV_test_Data and compared it with the ArUco detection method. The comparison results
are shown in Figure 12.
#1144
#1362
#0213
#2494
s
#0272
#1300
#0100
#1532
Scene 1
Scene 2
Detection Result
Tracking Result
Aruco Detection 
Detection Result
Tracking Result
Aruco Detection 
Figure 12. The infrared image target detection and tracking results in two scenarios compared with
an ArUco marker: detection results. The green circle represents correct detection and the red x indicates
wrong detection.
[p.22]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
22 of 31
Table 3. The detection performance on the test dataset.
Datasets
Total Targets
TP
FP
FN
Precision
Recall
F1-Measure
Scene 1
408
391
0
17
100.00%
95.83%
97.87%
Scene 2
960
957
0
3
100.00%
99.68%
99.83%
Scene 3
934
932
0
2
100.00%
99.78%
99.88%
Scene 4
421
419
0
2
100%
99.52%
99.75%
Scene 5
3175
3175
2
0
99.93%
100.00%
99.96%
Total
5898
5874
2
24
99.62%
99.59%
99.60%
The results of detection and tracking are shown in Figure 12. From the ﬁgure, we can determine
that the original images captured by the ﬁsheye camera have severe distortion and motion blur.
In addition, the target in the image is sometimes smaller and sometimes larger, such as Frames 272
and 1532 of Scene 2. These are great challenges for traditional marker detection algorithms. Observing
the detection results of the ArUco algorithm, we can see that even if the marker is detected in the
image after distortion correction, the detection effect is still poor. However, we can greatly improve the
detection performance by using the deep learning detection algorithm YOLOv3, such as in Frame 213
of Scene 1 and Frames 272 and 1532 of Scene 2. Nevertheless, this detection algorithm will still miss
targets and produce false alarms in complex environments. To address this, the tracking-by-detection
algorithm can further improve the positioning performance. For example, in Frame 1144 of Scene 1
and in Frame 1532 of Scene 2, our system could remove the false alarms and get the correct position
by the detecting and tracking method. In Frame 1362 of Scene 1, our system could predict the target
position and get the correct position through the detection and tracking method when a detection
was missed.
In short, by using a rich training dataset to train the network, our deep learning algorithm
YOLOv3 can be used in many common scenarios, and the detection effect is very good. Meanwhile,
we can achieve better UGV positioning performance by using the tracking-by-detection algorithm.
This is the basis of the autonomous landing system.
3.2.3. Stereo Depth-Based Flight Altitude Estimation Experiments
With the system, we used the depth estimation of the binocular stereo camera to estimate the
ﬂight altitude of the UAV. Speciﬁcally, we selected the average height of the 100 × 100 area located at
the center point of the depth map as the ﬂight altitude of the UAV, and we used the Kalman ﬁltering
method to obtain a more accurate altitude. This means that when the UAV was in the center of the
image, we used the distance between the UAV and the UGV as the true ﬂight altitude of the UAV.
When the UAV was not in the center of the image, we used the distance of the UAV from the ground
as its ﬂight altitude. The accuracy of the stereo depth estimation is critical to the state estimation of the
UGV in this autonomous landing system.
To prove the accuracy of the stereo altitude estimation, we carried out experiments in actual
scenes and compared the results with the real altitude measured by the GPS. The experimental results
are shown in Figure 13; blue, red, and yellow represent the directly calculated stereo depth, the depth
with Kalman ﬁltering, and the ground truth of the GPS, respectively. As we can see from the ﬁgure,
the estimated result is very close to the ground truth. From the experimental results in Figure 13, it can
be seen that the stereo depth estimation result is very close to the ground truth of the GPS, and the
error is within 0.5, regardless of whether the UAV is ﬂying at a ﬁxed altitude or if its altitude changes.
However, there are many small ﬂuctuations in the direct estimation result. After Kalman ﬁltering,
it can be seen that the curve becomes smooth, the estimated altitude tends to change smoothly, and the
accuracy does not decrease.
[p.23]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
23 of 31
 
Height
Frame number
(m)
Figure 13. Comparison of UAV altitude estimation. Blue, red, and yellow represent the stereo depth
estimation results, the stereo depth estimation results with Kalman ﬁltering, and the ground truth of
the GPS, respectively.
3.2.4. Bebop Autonomous Landing Experiments
After obtaining good UGV positioning results and UAV altitude results, we tested the performance
of the autonomous landing system in an actual scene. The drone used in this system was the M100,
which is bulky. If we directly use this drone for autonomous landing experiments, there is greater
risk involved. Therefore, we ﬁrst selected the light drone Bebop for testing the autonomous landing
performance in the actual scene. Speciﬁcally, the optical imaging system used in the autonomous
landing system built with Bebop is a monocular camera. We obtained the images through this camera
and estimated the altitude of the UAV using the monocular altitude method. The system built with
Bebop uses the same software system as the M100 system, including the UAV state estimation and
nonlinear controller. The results of the autonomous landing experiment are shown in Figure 14.
It should be noted that this UAV landing system is GPS-denied and cannot obtain the ground truth for
performance comparison.
 
 
(a)
(b)
Frame number
Velocity in X Direction
Velocity in Y Direction
Frame number
Frame number
Height (m)
(m/s)
(m/s)
Figure 14. The results of autonomous landing system built with Parrot Bebop, including (a) the ﬂight
altitude changes of UAV; (b) the velocity changes in the X and Y directions of the UGV and UAV.
[p.24]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
24 of 31
In the experiment, we set the initial altitude of the UAV to IH = 1.5 m, then autonomous landing
was carried out. Figure 14a shows the ﬂight altitude changes of the UAV throughout the experiment.
We can see that the UAV reached its initial height at t1, then began to land gradually when the UAV
reached its landing altitude of LH = 0.9 m. It landed successfully on the platform at t2. Figure 14b
shows the velocity changes in the X and Y directions of the UGV and UAV during landing. It can be
seen that after estimating the speed of the UGV, the system could guide the UAV ﬂight speed through
the nonlinear controller to better follow the movement of the UGV.
In summary, we can see from this real experiment that our autonomous landing system is robust
and effective. The system not only followed the moving UGV well, but also successfully landed on
the mobile platform. To prove the effectiveness of the system more comprehensively, we produced
a video demo of the landing process. Please review it in the Supplementary Material; we have posted
the demo on the website https://npuautolanding.github.io.
3.2.5. DJI M100 Following Experiments
To further test the effectiveness of the system, we used a real autonomous landing platform with
the DJI M100 to carry out UAV following experiments. We ﬁrst instructed the UAV to take off from
the ground, setting the initial height to IH = 3.8 m. Then, we controlled the ground UGV motion,
and the speed of the UGV was set to 0.6 m/s for operational safety. The UAV’s onboard processor
continuously detects and estimates the motion state of the UGV, and the control system is used to
guide the UAV to follow the UGV and gradually descend. When the altitude difference between them
is less than LH = 1.5 m, the UAV can land directly. In the experiment, for the sake of safety, the UAV
was not instructed to land, and the UAV following experiment ended when the altitude difference was
less than 1.5 m. The experimental results are shown in Figure 15.
Velocity in Y Direction
(b)
Frame number
(a)
Height (m)
 
 
Frame number
Velocity in X Direction
(m/s)
(m/s)
Frame number
Velocity in Y Direction
Figure 15. The results of the autonomous landing system built with DJI M100, including (a) the ﬂight
altitude changes of the UAV; (b) the velocity changes in the X and Y directions of the UGV and UAV.
Figure 15 shows the process of the UAV following the UGV and the experimental results, including
the ﬂight altitude changes of the UAV and the velocity changes in the X and Y directions of the UGV
and UAV. As can be seen from Figure 15a, the UAV reaches the initial altitude at t1, then follows the
UGV movement and gradually declines. At t2, the UAV is above the UGV and reaches the direct
[p.25]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
25 of 31
landing height. From Figure 15b, we can see that the speed of the UAV is always consistent with the
estimated speed of the UGV, achieving a better UAV following performance. Since our autonomous
landing is in a GPS-denied environment, we cannot compare the position of the vehicles with the
ground truth.
In a word, these experimental results prove that the autonomous landing system can follow
a moving UGV well and achieve a robust and effective performance. Moreover, the running time
of the system is acceptable, and the system is suitable for practical applications. In addition to
the experimental results presented in the paper, to prove the effectiveness of the system more
comprehensively, we produced a video demo of the UGV tracking process. Please review it in
the Supplementary Material.
4. Discussion
In this section, we further discuss some modules of the system. We ﬁrst describe the characteristics
of the processor NVIDIA Jetson TX2 used in the system, then illustrate the network selection of the
deep learning detection algorithm through comparative experiments. Thereafter, we discuss the depth
measurement precision of the binocular camera used, as well as the time performance of the system
nodes on the Jetson TX2.
4.1. NVIDIA Jetson TX2
In this system, we implemented the autonomous landing system with NVIDIA JETSON
TX2. NVIDIA Jetson TX2 is an AI supercomputer on a module powered by NVIDIA PascalTM
architecture. It supports the NVIDIA Jetpack SDK, which includes the BSP, libraries for deep learning
(TensorRT, cuDNN, etc.), computer vision (NVIDIA VisionWorks, OpenCV), GPU computing (CUDA),
multimedia processing, and more. It also includes ROS compatibility, OpenGL, advanced developer
tools, and much more. Best of all, it packs this performance into a small, power-efﬁcient unit that is
ideal for intelligent edge devices like robots and drones. The characteristics of NVIDIA JETSON TX2
are shown in Table 4.
Table 4. The NVIDIA Jetson TX2.
Content
Jetson TX2
GPU
NVIDIA PascalTM, 256 CUDA cores
CPU
dual-core NVIDIA Denver2 + quad-core ARM Cortex-A57
Memory
8 GB 128-bit LPDDR4 59.7 GB/s
PCIE
Gen 2 | 1 × 4 + 1 × 1 OR 2 × 1 + 1 × 2
USB
USB 3.0 + USB 2.0
Mechanical
50 mm × 87 mm (400-Pin Compatible Board-to-Board Connector)
From Table 4, we can see that NVIDIA Jetson TX2 is built around an NVIDIA PascalTM-family
GPU and equipped with 256 NVIDIA CUDA cores, dual-core NVIDIA Denver2, and quad-core ARM
Cortex-A57 CPUs. Moreover, it is loaded with 8 GB of memory and 59.7 GB/s of memory bandwidth,
and it features a variety of standard hardware interfaces, such as USB 3.0. The schematic diagram of
the interface connection of NVIDIA JETSON TX2 in the system is shown in Figure 10. We can see that
we only used the USB 3.0 interface for data transmission, including ﬁsheye camera image transmission,
binocular camera image transmission, and UAV control command transmission (USB-UART).
In addition, we tested the CPU and GPU usage in Jetson TX2 while the system was running.
In the experiment, we set the TX2’s power mode to MAX-N (maximum mode), at which the GPU
frequency and CPU frequency are 1.30 GHz and 2.0 GHz, respectively. When all the program modules
of the system are running, the CPU usage of each core of Jetson TX2 is as shown in Table 5. As can be
seen from Table 5, TX2 has six CPU cores. Among them, the usage of Core 2 and Core 3 varies widely,
[p.26]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
26 of 31
sometimes reaching 98%. The usage of the other four cores is relatively small, ranging from 40% to
70%. In addition, the GPU usage varies from 58% to 98%.
Table 5. The CPU usage in NVIDIA Jetson TX2.
Core 1
Core 2
Core 3
Core 4
Core 5
Core 6
43–66%
65–99%
57–98%
43–62%
40–62%
41–69%
4.2. Detection Network Choosing
The commonly used network models of YOLOv3 include a complete model, such as YOLOv3-416,
and the tiny model (YOLOv3-tiny). The complete model has 106 layers of network, which has a better
detection effect but slower speed. The tiny model (YOLOv3-tiny) only has 23 layers of network,
and its detection effect is slightly lower, but it is very fast. To choose the better network model,
we experimented with the YOLOv3-416 model and the YOLOv3-tiny model of YOLOv3 on our own
dataset. We chose the same training set (UGV_Train_Data) to train these two models and tested the
performance on the same test set (Scene 5). The experimental results are shown in Table 6.
Table 6. The YOLOv3-416 compared to YOLOv3-tiny in NVIDIA Jetson TX2.
Model
Train
Test
Speed (FPS)
Precision
Recall
F1-Measure
YOLOv3-416
UGV_Train_Data
Scene 5
3.00
98.91%
100.00%
99.45%
YOLOv3-tiny
UGV_Train_Data
Scene 5
20.00
99.93%
100.00%
99.96%
From the experimental results in Table 6, we can see that the detection rates of the two models on
our dataset are similar and close to 100.00%, but the speed of the YOLOv3-tiny is much faster than that
of the YOLOv3-416. Therefore, we chose the YOLOv3-tiny model accelerated by CUDNN for target
detection in the system. Extensive experimental results show that this YOLOv3 algorithm can meet
the system requirements for detection rate and time.
4.3. Stereo Depth Measurement Precision
For this system, we chose the MYNT EYE S1010-IR binocular stereo camera with a built-in (IR)
active photodetector to measure depth, which slightly enhances the measurement precision in white
wall and low-textured backgrounds. We know that the binocular camera is limited by the baseline,
and the depth measurement precision will decrease with the increase in the target’s distance. Therefore,
when the target is far away, the depth measurement error will be relatively large. The precision
curve and error curve of the depth measurement of the binocular camera in the system are shown in
Figure 16.
Depth measurement precision
distance/mm
distance/mm
distance/mm
Depth measurement error
Figure 16. The precision curve and error curve of the depth measurement of the binocular camera
MYNT EYE S1010-IR.
[p.27]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
27 of 31
From Figure 16, we can see that with the increase in the target’s distance, the difference between
the measured depth value and the theoretical value becomes larger, and the measurement error
increases. This means that the higher the UAV is ﬂying, the more inaccurate the altitude estimation,
and the worse the estimates of the motion and velocity of the involved platform. In the range of
0.7–3 m, the measured value is very close to the theoretical value, the error is less than 0.2 m, and the
precision is high. In the range of 3–8 m, the difference between them becomes obvious, the error is less
than 1 m, and the measurement precision is acceptable.
Therefore, we can conclude that the effective altitude estimation range of this binocular camera is
about 0.7–8 m. When the UAV’s ﬂight altitude is greater than the effective range, the depth estimate
will fail. However, the ﬂight altitude of the UAV is not limited by the accuracy of the binocular
camera. Because of the wide FOV of the ﬁsheye camera, when the ﬂight altitude is larger than the
effective range, we can locate the landing platform in the ﬁsheye image by using the detector with
better performance. Then, we roughly control the UAV landing to the effective altitude range based
on the position of the UGV in the image. Normally, in the process of autonomous landing of a UAV,
we need to ensure that the UAV landing precision is feasible within an 8 m altitude, and the lower the
altitude, the higher the precision. Consequently, for our UAV autonomous landing system, the depth
calculation of the binocular camera is effective during the landing process.
4.4. ROS Architecture-Based Running Time on Jetson TX2
To ensure the time performance and autonomous landing performance of the proposed system,
we adopted ROS parallel architecture to implement these modules, and these modules transmit data
through ROS communication. The system has ﬁve ROS nodes, including ﬁsheye image acquisition
and correction nodes, binocular image acquisition and depth estimation nodes, target detection nodes,
target tracking nodes, and UGV state estimation and nonlinear controller nodes. The running time of
each module is shown in Table 7.
Table 7. The Computation time for Jetson TX2.
Content
Mean
Standard Deviation
Fisheye Correction
6.15
1.97
(ms)
Stereo Depth Estimation
23.77
2.66
(ms)
Detection
51.24
55.69
(ms)
Tracking
1.51
0.86
(ms)
Motion compensation
105.71
0.03
(ms)
Nonlinear Control
0.34
0.07
(ms)
Total (Max thread)
110.08
0.03
(ms)
While counting the system runtime on Jetson TX2, we counted the runtime of each module
node, with the nodes in parallel. As can be seen from Table 7, the motion compensation module is
the most time-consuming (about 105.71 ms), the detection module is second most time-consuming
(about 51.24 ms), and the other modules are very fast. On average, the system takes about 110.08 ms to
process an image, resulting in a potential rate of approximately 9 Hz. In practice, we ﬁnd that such
a rate is sufﬁcient to achieve an effective landing performance.
4.5. Limitations
Through the qualitative and quantitative analysis of the experimental results, we veriﬁed that
the autonomous landing performance of the system in the GPS-denied environment is effective and
robust. However, there are still some limitations to the system, which mainly include the following
two aspects.
(1)
It is obvious that the landing performance depends on the result of the motion state estimation of
the UGV. In motion compensation, the system extracts SIFT feature points for image matching.
[p.28]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
28 of 31
The extraction of feature points is related to the environment. When the ground below the
ﬂight area is white or low-texture, the extracted feature points may be few, leading to the failure
of motion compensation. This seriously decreases the speed accuracy calculated for the UGV,
resulting in the deterioration or even failure of autonomous landing.
(2)
The system can update the UAV speed every 100 ms due to the limitation of onboard processing
capacity, and the UAV speed mutation also needs a certain amount of time. During the process
of the UAV following the UGV at a low altitude, if the speed direction of the UGV changes
considerably and the speed is very fast, it is difﬁcult to command the UAV to follow the UGV in
time. At this point, the UGV is likely to disappear from the UAV’s vision.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we propose a hybrid camera array-based autonomous landing of a UAV on a moving
UGV in a GPS-denied environment. This landing system fuses information from multiple airborne
sensors, including a wide FOV and depth information, to accurately detect, track, and locate a ground
moving UGV and estimate its motion state. Also, for this system, we designed a nonlinear controller
based on the UGV motion state to guide the UAV to autonomously land on the ground moving UGV
accurately. The system is suitable for all types of ground mobile platforms and does not require any
prior information, such as GPS or motion-capture systems.
To evaluate the performance of our system, we carried out many simulation experiments and
proved the validity and feasibility of the proposed algorithm through qualitative and quantitative
analyses. Moreover, we conducted outdoor ﬂight experiments in a GPS-denied environment, including
target location experiments, stereo depth-based UAV ﬂight altitude estimation experiments, Bebop
autonomous landing experiments, and DJI M100 following experiments. It was veriﬁed from many
aspects that the method not only achieves high-precision positioning, but also controls the autonomous
landing of the drone efﬁciently and robustly in a GPS-denied environment, which is suitable for real
environments. In the future, on the one hand, we aim to use a faster and more robust feature extraction
method, such as the depth learning-based feature extraction and matching method SuperPoint [46],
to address the problem that SIFT feature points are extracted slowly and are susceptible to a low-texture
background. On the other hand, we will explore the UAV and UGV cooperative system to achieve the
accurate perception of the environment and autonomous landing.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available at http://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/10/11/1829/s1.
Author Contributions: T.Y. and Q.R. contributed to the idea, designed the algorithm and wrote the manuscript.
Q.R. wrote the source code. F.Z. and H.R. revised the entire manuscript. B.X. contributed to the real-world
experiments. J.L. and Y.Z. provided the most of the suggestions on the experiment and meticulously revised
the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61672429,
61502364, 61272288, the National Students’ platform for innovation and entrepreneurship training program under
Grant 201710699243, and the Science,Technology and Innovation Commission of Shenzhen Municipality under
Grant JCYJ20160229172932237.
Acknowledgments: We thank Guang Yang and Sen Li for doing the real-world experiments.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Ajmera, J.; Siddharthan, P.R.; Ramaravind, K.M.; Vasan, G.; Balaji, N.; Sankaranarayanan, V. Autonomous
Visual Tracking and Landing of A Quadrotor on A Moving Platform. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Image Information Processing, Waknaghat, India, 21–24 December 2015; pp. 342–347.
2.
Lee, C.; Kim, D. Visual Homing Navigation With Haar-Like Features in the Snapshot. IEEE Access 2018,
6, 33666–33681. [CrossRef]
3.
Wei, H.; Wang, L. Visual Navigation Using Projection of Spatial Right-Angle in Indoor Environment.
IEEE Trans. Image Process. 2018, 27, 3164–3177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
[p.29]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
29 of 31
4.
Yang, T.; Li, P.; Zhang, H.; Li, J.; Li, Z. Monocular Vision SLAM-Based UAV Autonomous Landing in
Emergencies and Unknown Environments. Electronics 2018, 7, 73. [CrossRef]
5.
Serra, P.; Cunha, R.; Hamel, T.; Cabecinhas, D.; Silvestre, C. Landing of a Quadrotor on a Moving Target
Using Dynamic Image-Based Visual Servo Control. IEEE Trans. Robot. 2017, 32, 1524–1535. [CrossRef]
6.
Zheng, D.; Wang, H.; Wang, J.; Chen, S.; Chen, W.; Liang, X. Image-Based Visual Servoing of a Quadrotor
Using Virtual Camera Approach. IEEE Trans. Mechatron. 2017, 22, 972–982. [CrossRef]
7.
Falanga, D.; Zanchettin, A.; Simovic, A.; Delmerico, J.; Scaramuzza, D. Vision-based Autonomous Quadrotor
Landing on a Moving Platform. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Safety, Security and
Rescue Robotics, Shanghai, China, 11–13 October 2017; pp. 11–13.
8.
Xian, B.; Diao, C.; Zhao, B.; Zhang, Y. Nonlinear Robust Output Feedback Tracking Control of a Quadrotor
UAV using Quaternion Representation. Nonlinear Dyn. 2015, 79, 2735–2752. [CrossRef]
9.
Tang, D.; Jiao, Y.; Chen, J. On Automatic Landing System for Carrier Plane Based on Integration of INS, GPS
and Vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE Chinese Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference (CGNCC),
Nanjing, China, 12–14 August 2016; pp. 2260–2264.
10.
Tian, D.; He, X.; Zhang, L.; Lian, J.; Hu, X. A Design of Odometer-Aided Visual Inertial Integrated Navigation
Algorithm Based on Multiple View Geometry Constraints. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Intelligent Human-Machine Systems and Cybernetics, Hangzhou, China, 26–27 August 2017; pp. 161–166.
11.
Jing, L.; Congcong, L.; Yang, T.;Zhaoyang,L. A Novel Visual-Vocabulary-Translator-Based Cross-Domain
Image Matching. IEEE Access 2017, 5, 23190–23203.
12.
Jing, L.; Congcong, L.; Yang, T.;Zhaoyang,L. Cross-Domain Co-Occurring Feature for Visible-Infrared Image
Matching. IEEE Access 2018, 6, 17681–17698.
13.
Yang, T.; Li, G.; Li, J.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, Z.; Li, Z. A Ground-Based Near Infrared Camera Array
System for UAV Auto-Landing in GPS-Denied Environment. Sensors 2016, 16, 1393. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Kong, W.; Zhang, D.; Wang, X.; Xian, Z. Autonomous Landing of a UAV with a Ground-based Actuated
Infrared Stereo Vision System. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, Tokyo, Japan, 3–7 November 2013; pp. 2963–2970.
15.
Muskardin, T.; Balmer, G.; Wlach, S.; Kondak, K.; Laiacker, M.; Ollero, A. Landing of a Fixed-wing UAV on
A Mobile Ground Vehicle. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
Stockholm, Sweden, 16–21 May 2016; pp. 1237–1242.
16.
Ghamry, K.A.; Dong, Y.; Kamel, M.A.; Zhang, Y. Real-time Autonomous Take-off, Tracking and Landing of
UAV on A Moving UGV Platform. In Proceedings of the 2016 24th Mediterranean Conference on Control
and Automation (MED), Athens, Greece, 21–24 June 2016; pp. 1236–1241.
17.
Singh, S.; Padhi, R. Automatic Path Planning and Control Design for Autonomous Landing of UAVs
using Dynamic Inversion.
In Proceedings of the American Control Conference, St. Louis, MO, USA,
10–12 June 2009; pp. 2409–2414.
18.
Vishnu, R.D.; Nathan, M.; Martin, H.; Roland, B.; Stephan, W.; Jeremy, N.; Larry, M. Vision-based Landing
Site Evaluation and Informed Optimal Trajectory Generation Toward Autonomous Rooftop Landing.
Auton. Robot. 2015, 39, 445–463.
19.
Liu, W.; Anguelov, D.; Erhan, D.; Szegedy, C.; Reed, S.; Fu, C.Y.; Berg, A.C. SSD: Single Shot MultiBox
Detector. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
8–16 October 2016; pp. 21–37.
20.
Redmon, J.; Divvala, S.; Girshick, R.; Farhadi, A. You Only Look Once: Uniﬁed, Real-Time Object Detection.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Las Vegas Valley,
NV, USA, 26 June–1 July 2016; pp. 779–788.
21.
Redmon, J.; Farhadi, A. YOLO9000: Better, Faster, Stronger. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017; pp. 6517–6525.
22.
Zhang, Z. A Flexible New Technique for Camera Calibration. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2000,
22, 1330–1334. [CrossRef]
23.
Scaramuzza, D.; Martinelli, A.; Siegwart, R. A Flexible Technique for Accurate Omnidirectional Camera
Calibration and Structure from Motion. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision Systems, New York, NY, USA, 4–7 January 2006; p. 45.
[p.30]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
30 of 31
24.
Rehder, J.; Nikolic, J.; Schneider, T.; Siegwart, R. A Direct Formulation for Camera Calibration. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Singapore, 29 May–3 June 2017;
pp. 6479–6486.
25.
Wu, Y.; Sui, Y.; Wang, G. Vision-Based Real-Time Aerial Object Localization and Tracking for UAV Sensing
System. IEEE Access 2017, 5, 23969–23978. [CrossRef]
26.
Li, J.; Zhang, F.; Wei, L.; Yang, T.; Lu, Z. Nighttime Foreground Pedestrian Detection based on Three-dimensional
Voxel Surface Model. Sensors 2017, 17, 2354. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Nguyen, P.H.; Arsalan, M.; Koo, J.H.; Naqvi, R.A.; Truong, N.Q.; Park, K.R. LightDenseYOLO: A Fast and
Accurate Marker Tracker for Autonomous UAV Landing by Visible Light Camera Sensor on Drone. Sensors
2018, 18, 1703. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Redmon, J.; Farhadi, A. YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1804.02767.
29.
Rezatoﬁghi, S.H.; Milan, A.; Zhang, Z.; Shi, Q. Joint Probabilistic Data Association Revisited. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Santiago, Chile,
7–13 December 2015; pp. 3047–3055.
30.
Bewley, A.; Ge, Z.; Ott, L.; Ramos, F.; Upcroft, B. Simple Online and Realtime Tracking. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, Phoenix, AZ, USA, 25–28 September 2016;
pp. 3464–3468.
31.
Rezatoﬁghi, S.H.; Milani, A.; Zhang, Z.; Shi, Q.; Dick, A.; Reid, I. Joint Probabilistic Matching Using m-Best
Solutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Las Vegas, NV, USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 136–145.
32.
Bochinski, E.; Eiselein, V.; Sikora, T. High-Speed Tracking-by-detection without using Image Information.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance,
Lecce, Italy, 29 August–1 September 2017; pp. 1–6.
33.
Chen, T.; Pennisi, A.; Li, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Sahli, H. A Hierarchical Association Framework for Multi-Object
Tracking in Airborne Videos. Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1347. [CrossRef]
34.
Ren, S.; He, K.; Girshick, R.; Sun, J. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-time Object Detection with Region Proposal
networks.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
Montreal, QC, Cananda, 7–12 December 2015; pp. 91–99.
35.
Hosang, J.; Benenson, R.; Schiele, B. Learning Non-maximum Suppression. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017;
pp. 6469–6477.
36.
Sorenson, H.W. Kalman Filtering : Theory and Application; The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
Inc.: New York, USA, 1985; pp. 131–150.
37.
Maughan, D.S.; Erekson, I.; Sharma, R. Using Extended Kalman Filter for Robust Control of a Flying
Inverted Pendulum. In Proceedings of the Signal Processing and Signal Processing Education Workshop,
Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 9–12 August 2016; pp. 101–106.
38.
Lowe, D.G. Distinctive Image Features from Scale-invariant Keypoints. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 2004, 60, 91–110.
[CrossRef]
39.
Tao, T.; Koo, J.C.; Choi, H.R. A fast Block Matching Algorthim for Stereo Correspondence. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems, Chengdu, China, 21–24 September 2008;
pp. 38–41.
40.
Hirschmuller, H. Stereo Processing by Semiglobal Matching and Mutual Information. IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 2008, 30, 328–341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Hernandez-Juarez, D.; Chacón, A.; Espinosa, A.; Vázquez, D.; Moure, J.C.; López, A.M. Embedded Real-time
Stereo Estimation via Semi-Global Matching on the GPU. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Computational Science, San Diego, CA, USA, 6–8 June 2016; pp. 143–153.
42.
Zhang, L.; Bi, S.; Yang, H. Fuzzy-PID Control Algorithm of The Helicopter Model Flight Attitude Control.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Control and Decision Conference, Xuzhou, China, 26–28 May 2010;
pp. 1438–1443.
43.
Zhang, D.; Chen, Z.; Xi, L. Adaptive Dual Fuzzy PID Control Method for Longitudinal Attitude Control of
Tail-sitter UAV. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Automation and Computing, Colchester,
UK, 7–8 September 2016; pp. 378–382.
[p.31]
Remote Sens. 2018, 10, 1829
31 of 31
44.
Shah, S.; Dey, D.; Lovett, C.; Kapoor, A. Airsim: High-ﬁdelity Visual and Physical Simulation for Autonomous
Vehicles. In Field and Service Robotics; Springer: Cham,Switzerland, 2018; pp. 621–635.
45.
Tzutalin. LabelImg. Available online: https://github.com/tzutalin/labelImg (accessed on December 2017).
46.
Daniel, D.; Tomasz, M.; Andrew, R. SuperPoint: Self-Supervised Interest Point Detection and Description.
In Proceedings of the CVPR Deep Learning for Visual SLAM Workshop,Salt Lake City, Utah,USA,
18–22 June 2018.
c⃝2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
=== END ===
