warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0687.pdf
sha256: 06E1CFCC35AB946171921C898A3993E00ACBF5C979033DB7954CC007FA3EBAC7
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 6
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
 
 
978-1-6654-5690-6/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE 
On the scalability of experimentally determined
aerodynamic model for model-based navigation on
a delta-wing UAV
P. Longobardi∗†, J. Skaloud∗
∗EPFL-CRYOS, Route Cantonale, Station 18, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
†Contact: pasquale.longobardi@epfl.ch
Abstract—Model-based navigation is a promising approach for
autonomous navigation of small drones in challenging conditions
such as GNSS denied flight scenarios. However, the lack of anal-
ysis of aerodynamic model structure for model-based navigation
applications on delta-wing UAVs, characterized by a reduced
number of control surfaces, has hindered its practical implemen-
tation. In this study, we propose a methodology for generalizing
an aerodynamic model experimentally determined for a specific
platform to a family of platforms sharing comparable physical
characteristics by employing in-flight tuning. The experimental
results show that the proposed methodology significantly im-
proves navigation performance under GNSS outage, compared
to traditional autonomous navigation approaches, for the model
adapted to a second delta-wing platform. This indicates that the
proposed methodology can be used to adapt aerodynamic models
to different delta-wing UAV platforms of similar size, enabling re-
liable model-based navigation in challenging environments. This
work contributes to the advancement of autonomous navigation
technology for small drones, particularly in applications where
GNSS signals are unavailable or unreliable.
Index Terms—UAV, model-based navigation, VDM, aerody-
namic characterization, delta-wing.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been a surge in the use of
delta-wing unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for mapping and
surveying missions, primarily due to their high payload to
frame ratio, which allows for the implementation of advanced
sensors such as thermal-cameras and lidar. Delta-wing UAVs
offer increased autonomy, making them a preferred choice over
rotorcraft when mapping broader areas. As delta-wing UAVs
operate further away from home position, or even BVLOS1,
navigation safety becomes important. Outdoor navigation of
small drones heavily relies on GNSS2 as one of the main
aiding systems. GNSS complements the short-term accurate
data provided by Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) with
its long-term accuracy. However, GNSS outages can occur in
various scenarios, compromising localization quality particu-
larly when using small and inexpensive IMUs. These outages
can result from various factors, including clustered environ-
ments limiting satellite visibility, unintentional disturbances,
such as electromagnetic interference from nearby sources,
or intentional actions like spoofing or jamming. A common
solution involves the usage of additional optical sensors such
1Beyond Visual Line of Sight
2Global Navigation Satellite Systems
as cameras or lidars. However, the integration of additional
sensors leads to increased costs and heavier payloads, which
can potentially reduce the flight endurance of the system.
Moreover, the use of optical aiding is not always feasible due
to environmental dependencies, as the necessary conditions
for optimal performance might not always be met. Factors
like fog, clouds, mist, water, and homogeneus surfaces can
indeed hinder their effectiveness. Withouth the help of addi-
tional sensors, during GNSS ouatge scenarios, the INS-based
solution quickly drifts, rendering it unsuitable for navigation
purposes. Model-based navigation, also known as VDM, is
a promising approach for improving autonomous navigation
of small drones, particularly in such challenging scenarios.
It incorporates additional information on vehicle dynamics
and control inputs, considering all the remaining sensor data,
including the INS, as measurements. Recent studies have
demonstrated significant improvements in navigation accuracy
compared to inertial coasting, both in simulation [1]–[3] and
empirical testing [4]–[8]. However, most of their progress
on model-based navigation for drones refers to conventional
UAVs with four control surfaces with a known and well-
defined model structure which originates from [9]. Indeed,
correct model structure is essential for successful implementa-
tion of model-based navigation. However, despite the growing
interest in delta-wing UAVs for a variety of applications, there
is a lack of accessible resources on aerodynamic modeling
for this type of platform. Previous studies [10] have relied
on a model structure defined for a similar shaped platform,
the ZAGI MAV flying wing, whose aerodynamic model and
related coefficients values are detailed in [11]. However, this
platform is primarily used for research and hobby purposes
and is much smaller and lighter than typical UAV platforms
used for mapping. The study in [10] shows that, although
a VDM model based on this structure reduce slightly the
positioning error of inertial coasting, this model structure does
not adequately capture the aerodynamic behavior of a larger
delta-wing UAVs. To address this gap, this paper presents
an experimental study on the scalability of an aerodynamic
model derived for a custom delta-wing UAV to another flying-
wing with similar physical properties. In other words, finding
a model structure that is applicable to a family of larger
platforms while the model-coefficients calibration remains
specific to each platform. In broader terms, the study aims
19
2023 IEEE 10th International Workshop on Metrology for AeroSpace (MetroAeroSpace) | 978-1-6654-5690-6/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/METROAEROSPACE57412.2023.10189996
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
 
 
to improve the understanding of the aerodynamic behavior of
delta-wing UAVs and provide insights for the development of
model-based navigation approaches for this type of platform.
The paper is organized as follows: First, we recall the main
principles of model-based navigation in II. Then in III we
introduce the platforms used in this study. The employed
methodology is detailed in IV and the results of the study in
V. Finally, section VI provides a conclusion and perspectives
for future work.
II. MODEL-BASED NAVIGATION
An Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is chosen to serve as
the model-based navigation filter in this research. The filter
architecture utilized is presented in Figure 1.
Fig. 1. Navigation system architecture
This architecture is based on the original proposition of
[1] and, contrary to other alternatives as the ones proposed
in [12]–[14], employs the vehicle dynamic model as the
filter main process model and all the remaining sensor mea-
surements, included IMU, as observations. A more detailed
mathematical description of the filter implementation can
be found in [1]. The state estimation property of EKF is
exploited to actively correct the vehicle model parameters
based on collected data. The filter augmented state vector
contains the navigation solution (Xn), the actuator states (Xa),
the aerodynamic characterization of the platform (Xp), the
stochastic parameters of the modelled sensor errors (Xe) and,
finally, the wind components (Xw ). The full augmented state
vector is thus:
X =


Xn
Xa
Xp
Xw
Xe


(1)
The augmented states are constantly updated and tuned dur-
ing the flight allowing to account for unmodeled contributions
in their initialization.
III. RESEARCH UAV PLATFORM
The platforms employed for this work are depicted in Figure
2 and are named respectively eBee X (left) and Concorde S
(right).
Fig. 2. eBeeX from SenseFly SA(left), Concorde S delta-wing (right)
The “eBee X” is a delta-wing UAV produced by SenseFly
an AgEagle company. It has been the leading platform for
photogrammetry/mapping mission, with BVLOS authorization
in EU, US and Canada. The “Concorde S” is a customized
flying-wing developed at the Geodetic Engineering Laboratory
at EPFL. It is a customization of an existing hobby product
(Xeno Electric), modified to accommodate a larger and heavier
payload. The power-train system was also upgraded in order to
satisfy the increased take-off weight. Additional sensors such
as rpm, airspeed and angle of attack have been integrated to
conduct this research. The employed autopilot is a Pixhawk
4 Holybro running the open-source software PX4 (firmware
version fmu-v5) and connecting, via a customized interface,
a multi frequency GNSS receiver (JAVAD TR-2S). A base
receiver is used in parallel to provide cm-level positioning in
postprocessed mode (PPK). Figure 3 presents a schematic of
the Concorde S autopilot with the employed external sensors
and actuators.
GNSS receiver
Airspeed sensor
Telemetry
module
Radio module
Servos (x2)
Rpm sensor
Communication
Control
Sensors
Fig. 3. Schematics of the components connected to the onboard autopilot.
20
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
 
 
Table I presents the main physical and geometrical proper-
ties of the two platforms employed in this work along with
the Zagi MAV [11].
TABLE I
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF THE CONSIDERED UAV PLATFORMS
Concorde S
eBee X
Zagi MAV
Mass m
1.5 kg
1.45 kg
0.43 kg
Wing span b
1.29 m
1.17 m
0.93 m
Wing surface S
0.4 m2
0.32 m2
0.19 m2
Mean chord ¯c
0.26 m
0.29 m
0.20 m
Quarter chord wing
sweep Λc/4
30◦
35◦
34.69◦
IV. METHODOLOGY
Determining an adequate aerodynamic model structure is
crucial for successful implementation of model-based navi-
gation. However, this process is generally time-consuming,
requiring special equipment and expertise. Due to this reason,
applicability of model structure to several similar planes is
quite useful. The proposed methodology focuses on achieving
two main subsequent tasks:
• Model structure identification
• Model coefficients identification
Specifically, we employ the aerodynamic model structure
experimentally determined for the Concorde S and adapt the
aerodynamic coefficients to a new platform, the eBee X,
through in-flight calibration. The state estimation property of
Extended Kalman Filtering is then employed to determine
the eBee X aerodynamic derivatives. We then evaluate the
performance of the model-based navigation approach for the
eBee X under challenging conditions, specifically a GNSS
outage lasting 3 minutes. We compare the obtained results
with the ones provided by the traditional kinematic approach
to autonomous navigation. The aerodynamic model is tuned
and tested using an offline implementation of the proposed
model-based navigation filter. Flight data are obtained from a
real test flight of the eBee X and the navigation filter only
relies on a subset of sensors (IMU, GNSS and barometer)
and control commands (motor RPM and elevons deflections),
providing a solution as if it were obtained in real-time.
A. Model structure identification
The experimental analysis for the Concorde S, detailed in
[15], has been performed in an open wind tunnel facility
employing a wind generator called “windshaper” [16]. The
determined model structure is a compromise between accuracy
and simplicity. As shown in [17], [18] a complex model (i.e.
characterized by a great number of aerodynamic coefficients)
causes two main issues: high computational load and filter
numerical instability. The first is due to the higher com-
putational requirements, particularly in terms of covariance
matrix propagation, of a navigation filter with many states
estimates hence limiting the potential to be implemented in
less powerful computational units as the one employed by on-
board autopilots. The latter is caused by the high correlation
among the model coefficients which hinders the determina-
tion of truthful aerodynamic derivatives when using in-flight
tuning and might lead to filter divergence. We employ multi-
linear regression (MLR) to infer a model for each equation
characterizing the force and moment components. Notably, the
resulting equations are linear in the aerodynamic coefficients,
but not necessarily in the explanatory variables. As a result,
we allow for the inclusion of quadratic terms and interactions
among the explanatory variables. The obtained model is hence:
CD = CD0 + CDα2α2
(2)
CY = CY ββ
(3)
CL = CL0 + CLαα
(4)
CMx = CMx0 + CMxδaδa
(5)
CMy = CMy0 + CMyαα + CMxδeδe
(6)
CMz = CMzδaδeδaδe
(7)
Where:
δa = αL −αR
2
(8)
δe = αL + αR
2
(9)
with αL , αR respectively indication a deflection of the
left and right elevon. Of particular interest is the presence
of the CMzδaδe control derivative, which can be attributed
to the unique control limitations of a flying wing. Unlike
conventional aircraft with dedicated control surfaces, flying
wings possess only two control surfaces (elevons) and cannot
directly control yaw via deflection of an assigned control
surface (rudder).
B. Model coefficient calibration
As depicted in section II the aerodynamic derivatives are
included in the model-based EKF augmented state vector
such that their values can be corrected in-flight based on
the IMU-GNSS observations. The initial state vector X0 is
initialized with priors based on the wind tunnel results for the
Concorde S. The initial covariance matrix P0 is set such that
the aerodynamic related states can adapt to the actual platform
dynamics while avoiding overfitting. For that purpose, we
chose a flight pattern where the initial portion of the trajectory
is characterized by several different maneuvers aimed to
excite all the different stability and control derivatives. An
example of maneuvers employed for this objective are 8-loops
(Figure 4) for excitation of lateral dynamics and ascending and
descending corridors (Figure 5) for excitation of longitudinal
dynamics.
21
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
 
 
Fig. 4. Lateral dynamics excitation maneuver
Fig. 5. Longitudinal dynamics excitation maneuver
Once the aerodynamic coefficients are stabilized within
the state vector, we consider them as calibrated to the new
platform.
V. RESULTS
The calibrated coefficients are then tested on parts of the
trajectory characterized by different dynamics to assess their
goodness and detect possible overfitting. Table II summarizes
the performance for the portions of flight being tested whereas
Figure 6 depicts the evolution of horizontal error in VDM
based navigation with respect to the traditional navigation
approach. The GNSS outages are artificially reproduced via
withholding of the GNSS position and velocity during 3
consecutive minutes.
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF THE GNSS OUTAGES RESULTS
Name
Start outage
INS max err
VDM max err.
outage 1
480 s
944 m
36 m
outage 2
900 s
741 m
74 m
outage 3
1540 s
1129 m
186 m
Fig. 6. Evolution of the horizontal error under GNSS outage.
A longer outage (∼11 min) is generated for the last testing
portion of the trajectory to test the long term performance
and the impact on the covariance matrices. Figure 7 compares
the output of model-based navigation with the navigation
solution provided by traditional navigation approach during
GNSS outage (Closer look in Figure 8).
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
-500
0
500
1000
East (Local Frame)
North (Local Frame)
Reference trajectory
Model-based nav. solution
Traditional nav. solution
GNSS outage
Fig. 7. Horizontal error for GNSS denied navigation.
22
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
 
 
-200
0
200
400
600
800
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
East (Local Frame)
North (Local Frame)
Reference trajectory
Model-based nav. solution
Traditional nav. solution
GNSS outage
Fig. 8. Horizontal error for GNSS denied navigation (close view).
Figure 9 depicts the covariance matrix of the aerodynamic
coefficients related states after the calibration phase for the
proposed model.
Fig. 9. Covariance matrix after calibration for the proposed model.
It can be seen how the correlation is mainly restricted within
coefficients of a same force or moment component, aside from
the known dependence of drag on the lift due to the lift induced
drag. In particular, it is important to underline the improvement
brought with respect to the general model utilized in [10] (Eq
(9)-(14)) whose covariance matrix for the aerodynamic states
at the end of the same calibration phase is depicted in Figure
10.
CD =CD0 + CDαα + CDα2α2 + CDββ + CDδeδe + CDωxωx+
CDωyωy + CDωzωz
(10)
CY =CY ββ + CY β2β2 + CY δaδa + CY ωxωx + CY ωyωy+
CY ωzωz
(11)
CL =CL0 + CLαα + CLα2α2 + CLββ + CLδeδe + CLωxωx+
CLωyωy + CLωzωz
(12)
CMx =CMxβ β + CMxβ2β2 + CMxδa δa + CMxωx ωx + CMxωx ωx+
CMxωz ωz
(13)
CMy =CMy0 + CMyαα + CMyα2α2 + CMyββ + CMyδeδe+
CMyωxωx + CMyωyωy + CMyωzωz
(14)
CMz =CMzβ β + CMzβ2β2 + CMzδa δa + CMzωx ωx + CMzωx ωx+
CMzωz ωz
(15)
Fig. 10. Covariance matrix after calibration for the general model.
VI. CONCLUSIONS & PERSPECTIVES
Overall, our results show that the structure of the aerody-
namic model proposed for a specific platform can be applied
with good accuracy to a second platform with comparable
physical properties when the model parameters are calibrated
in-flight via state-space estimation. Great importance for a
succesfull calibration must be given to proper aerdynamic
excitation of lateral and longitudianl dynamics via specific
meneuvers. The ones presented in this study were found
to be effective. We show the imporvements in navgation in
a GNSS denied scenario brought by the proposed model-
based navigation architecture with respect to the traditional
kinematic approach, demonstrating the effectiveness of our
model-based navigation for UAV in real-world scenarios.
Future work should assess the robustness of the newly deter-
mined aerodynamic model for flight scenarios characterized
by different environmental condition (i.e. wind) and flight
dynamics. Additionally, it would be advisable the comparison
23
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
 
 
with aerodynamic coefficients obtained through regression for
the proposed model structure to verify their accordance with
the coefficients determined in this study
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to express his sincere gratitude to Dr.
G. Laupr´e, C. Tournery and J-C. Charlaix for their contribution
to this study.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Khaghani and J. Skaloud, ”Autonomous vehicle dynamic model-
based navigation for small uavs”, In Navigation, vol. 63, no. 3, pp.
345–358, 2016.
[2] H. Mwenegoha, T. Moore, J. Pinchin and M. Jabbal, ”Enhanced fixed
wing uav navigation in extended gnss outages using a vehicle dynamics
model and raw gnss observables” In Proceedings of the 32nd inter-
national technical meeting of the satellite division of the institute of
navigation (ION GNSS+ 2019) , pp.2552-2565, 2019.
[3] H. Mwenegoha, T. Moore, J. Pinchin and M. Jabbal, ”Error character-
istics of a model-based integration approach for fixed-wing unmanned
aerial vehicles” In Journal of Navigation , 74(6):1353-1366, 2021.
[4] M. Khaghani and J. Skaloud, ”Assessment of vdm-based autonomous
navigation of a UAV under operational conditions”, Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, pp.152-164, 2018.
[5] G.Laupr´e and J. Skaloud, ”Calibration of Fixed-Wing UAV Aerody-
namic Coefficients with Photogrammetry for VDM-based Navigation”,
in Proceedings of the 2021 International Technical Meeting of The
Institute of Navigation, pp.775-786, 2021.
[6] G. Laupr´e and J. Skaloud, ” On the self-calibration of aerodynamic
coefficients in vehicle dynamic model-based navigation.”, in Drones,
4(3). 2020.
[7] H. Mwenegoha, T. Moore, J. Pinchin and M. Jabbal, ”A model-based
tightly coupled architecture for low-cost unmanned aerial vehicles for
real-time applications” IEEE Access , 2020.
[8] M. Khaghani and J. Skaloud, ”Positioning Autonomy of a Fixed-
Wing UAV through VDM/INS Integration with Experimental Results”
In Proceedings of the 29th International Technical Meeting of The
Satellite Division of the Institute of Navigation (ION GNSS+2016) ,
pp. 332–2337, Portland, Oregon, USA, 2017.
[9] G.J. Ducard, ” Nonlinear aircraft model. Fault-tolerant Flight Control
and Guidance Systems: Practical Methods for Small Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles” , pages 27-41, 2009.
[10] G.Laupr´e, P. Longobardi, J. Skaloud and J-C. Charlaix, ”Model based
navigation of delta-wing uav-in-flight calibration and autonomous per-
formance.” In European Journal of Navigation , 21:22–30, 2021.
[11] G. Platanitis and S. Shkarayev, ”Integration of an Autopilot for a Micro
Air Vehicle.” 10.2514/6.2005-7066. (2005)
[12] P. Crocoll, J. Seibold, G. Scholz, and G. F. Trommer, ”Model-Aided
Navigation for a Quadrotor Helicopter: A Novel Navigation System and
First Experimental Results” In Navigation , vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 253–271,
2014.
[13] P. Crocoll and G. F. Trommer, ”Quadrotor Inertial Navigation Aided
by a Vehicle Dynamics Model with In-Flight Parameter Estimation” In
Proceedings of the 27th International Technical Meeting of The Satellite
Division of the Institute of Navigation (ION GNSS+ 2014), Tampa,
Florida, 2014, pp. 1784–1795.
[14] K. M¨uller, P. Crocoll, and G. F. Trommer, “Wind Estimation for a
Quadrotor Helicopter in a Model-Aided Navigation System,” In 22nd
Saint Petersburg International Conference on Integrated Navigation
Systems, , Saint Petersburg, Russia, 2015.
[15] P. Longobardi, G. Bonneau, J. Skaloud. ”Wind Tunnel Characterization
of a Delta-Wing UAV for Model-Based Navigation.” (Unpublished-
Manuscript currently under review)
[16] F. Noca, G. Catry, N. Bosson, L. Bardazzi, S. Marquez and A. Gros.
”Wind and weather facility for testing free-flying drones.” (2019)
[17] L. Pirlet, ”Kalman Filter Adaptation for Stable Autonomous Drone
Navigation.” (2021). URL: http://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/295193.
[18] G. Laupr´e, ”Optimization and Real-Time Aspects of Aircraft Model-
Based Navigation.” PhD Thesis, EPFL, Lausanne, 2022.
24
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
