warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0622.pdf
sha256: AD6A54DCA7045A3B10C95A6E88F5C6369D23D4CBB1C20B512611595D625EF270
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 9
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
2684
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2023
Micro-Drone Ego-Velocity and Height Estimation
in GPS-Denied Environments Using
an FMCW MIMO Radar
Jeremy Barra, Thierry Creuzet, Suzanne Lesecq
, Gerard Scorletti
, Eric Blanco
,
and Mykhailo Zarudniev
Abstract—In the context of autonomous navigation, the
vehicle trajectory estimation and the detection of surround-
ing obstacles are two critical functionalities that must be
robust to difﬁcult environmental conditions (e.g., fog, dust,
and snow) and the unavailability of infrastructure signals
(e.g., GPS). With the advantage of remaining operable in low-
visibility conditions, radar sensors are good candidates to
detect obstacles in an autonomous navigation context. In this
article, we show that radars can also be successfully used
for real-time trajectory estimation. We address the case of
an autonomous micro-drone intended for the exploration of
piping networks and embedding a frequency-modulated con-
tinuous wave (FMCW) multi-input multioutput (MIMO) radar.
We show that using a beamforming technique to virtually
steer the radar ﬁeld of view (FOV), we can simultaneously
estimate the horizontal and vertical velocities of the drone
as well as its height. These results are ﬁrst validated through
simulations based on experimental drone ﬂight data and a
radar simulator. Then, using an Inﬁneon 77-GHz FMCW radar,
we show, through real-world experiments, the high performance attainable with our solution.
IndexTerms— Autonomousnavigation,Dopplermatrix, ego-velocityestimation, frequency-modulatedcontinuouswave
(FMCW), GPS denied, multi-input multioutput (MIMO) radar.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE purpose of an autonomous navigation system is to
allow mobile agents, such as robots [1], vehicles [2],
and people [3], [4], to navigate to their objective without
colliding into obstacles. This requires several functionalities,
such as obstacles detection, trajectory estimation, and control.
In this article, we focus on the autonomous navigation of
mobile agents in an unknown environment and without any
infrastructure signals (e.g., GPS). This corresponds, for exam-
ple, to robots navigating underground for mapping [5] or leak
Manuscript received 15 November 2022; accepted 28 November
2022. Date of publication 20 December 2022; date of current version
31 January 2023. This work supported in part by the EU 2020 Project
INSPEX, under Agreement 730953. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Dr. Francesco
Fioranelli. (Corresponding author: Suzanne Lesecq.)
Jeremy Barra is with the CEA, Leti, Université Grenoble Alpes, F-38000
Grenoble, France, and also with the Laboratoire Ampère CNRS, École
Centrale de Lyon, Université de Lyon, 69007 Lyon, France.
Thierry Creuzet, Suzanne Lesecq, and Mykhailo Zarudniev are with
the CEA, Leti, Université Grenoble Alpes, 38000 Grenoble, France
(e-mail: suzanne.lesecq@cea.fr).
Gerard Scorletti and Eric Blanco are with the Laboratoire Ampère
CNRS, École Centrale de Lyon, Université de Lyon, 69007 Lyon, France.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSEN.2022.3229421
detection [6]. More speciﬁcally, we consider the use case of
the mapping of piping networks using a small unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV), such as the BitCraze Crazyﬂie [7]. In particular,
this small micro-drone (7 cm between rotors) is well suited
to the navigation in conﬁned spaces. However, due to its
limited payload and computational capacity, the autonomous
navigation software and sensors must be as light as possible
in terms of weight and computations in order to be embedded
on the micro-drone and to maximize battery life.
In an unknown environment denied from any infrastructure
signals, the only measurements available to the autonomous
agent are the ones provided by its embedded sensors. These
sensors must provide information needed in order to esti-
mate the agent’s trajectory and detect surrounding obstacles.
These sensors can be of two kinds: proprioceptive sensors,
such as inertial sensors, and exteroceptive sensors, such
as cameras, sonars, lidars, and radars. While propriocep-
tive sensors measure internal parameters of the agent’s state
(e.g., angular velocity), exteroceptive sensors get information
on the agent’s environment (e.g., distance to an obstacle).
A common approach in an infrastructure signal-denied context
is to realize the fusion of the information from multiple sensors
in order to estimate the agent’s trajectory [8].
1558-1748 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
BARRA et al.: MICRO-DRONE EGO-VELOCITY AND HEIGHT ESTIMATION IN GPS-DENIED ENVIRONMENTS
2685
In the literature on drone navigation, there are numerous
successful solutions based on the fusion of inertial sensors with
exteroceptive sensors based on the visible or infrared spectra,
such as monocular cameras [9], [10], stereo cameras [11], [12],
or lidars [13]. This comes, however, with some disadvantages,
such as the computational cost for extracting features with
cameras requiring the images to be processed off-board on
a computer station or onboard using a dedicated integrated
circuit [9], [14], and the obstruction of the sensors in case
of difﬁcult environmental conditions (dust, fog, and varying
ambient light). These solutions are, thus, not adapted to our
use case of the piping mapping with a micro-drone, which
requires a low computational cost in order to maximize battery
life and the ability to work in a potentially visually obstructed
environment. Another type of sensor that has recently gained
attention in the literature on autonomous navigation is radar
because of its high accuracy and robustness to visually
degraded conditions [15]. The main disadvantages of radar
are its high power consumption and bulkiness, which makes
it difﬁcult to embark on a micro-drone. However, due to
recent technological advances, compact radars commercially
available with a low power consumption (about 1 W [16], [17])
exist and could be integrated on small UAVs [18].
In this article, we consider the use of frequency-modulated
continuous waves (FMCW) radar, allowing to simultaneously
measure the distance and velocity of targets. This type of
radar is particularly interesting for autonomous navigation,
as it can provide a lot of information on the UAV environment
in order to detect and track obstacles [19]. Here, we show that,
additionally, from this obstacle detection functionality, we can
also use this sensor to estimate the ego velocity and distance
to ground of the UAV.
The contributions of this article are twofold. First, we show
that a single-input single-output (SISO) FMCW radar can
be used to estimate the horizontal translation velocity of
the drone, assuming that its height and attitude are known
(e.g., measured, respectively, by a distance-to-ground sensor
and an inertial sensors unit). Then, we show that if instead of
an SISO radar, we have a multi-input multioutput (MIMO)
radar, and we can get rid of the hypothesis of the known
height, and, thus, of the distance-to-ground sensor, and extend
the velocity estimation to the other motion dimensions. We
use advanced digital beamforming techniques to virtually steer
the radar’s ﬁeld of view (FOV) to particular areas of the
environment in order to simultaneously estimate the drone
velocity and height, which are both critical parameters of any
autonomous navigation system.
This
article
is
organized as
follows. We
ﬁrst
give,
in Section II, some background about radar sensors measure-
ments and the beamforming technique for MIMO radars that
will be used later on. Then, we formalize the problem of veloc-
ity estimation with a radar and review the existing solutions in
the radar literature in Section III. In Section IV, we present our
contribution in Sections IV-A and IV-B respectively: Section
IV-A corresponds to the algorithm for estimating the UAV
horizontal velocity using an SISO radar assuming its attitude
and height are known; then, Section IV-B presents an extension
of this work to include the height and the vertical velocity
Fig. 1. MIMO radar with one transmitting and two receiving antennas.
estimation using an MIMO radar. In Section V, we validate our
estimation algorithm using experimental data gathered using
a micro-drone BitCraze Crazyﬂie and a proprietary FMCW
radar simulator. Finally, in Section VI, we perform real-world
experiments using an Inﬁneon 77 GHz MIMO FMCW radar
to validate the ego-velocity and height estimation algorithm.
II. BACKGROUND ON RADAR SIGNAL PROCESSING
We ﬁrst introduce some basic ideas about radar sensors that
will be used later on.
A. Radar Measurements
FMCW radars can be used to measure simultaneously the
distance and the velocity of obstacles. The distance informa-
tion can be obtained by measuring the round trip time τ of an
electromagnetic wave emitted by the radar and reﬂected by an
obstacle. Since the celerity of the wave is known, the distance
to the obstacle is deduced from the formula
R = c · τ
2
(1)
where c = 3 · 108 m · s−1 is the celerity of an electromagnetic
wave, τ is the round-trip time, and R is the distance to the
obstacle.
The measurement of an obstacle velocity is based on the
Doppler effect. It gives a relation between the frequency f0
of a wave emitted by a radar and the frequency f of the
wave reﬂected by a moving obstacle according to their relative
velocity v cos(θ) [20]
f = f −f0 = 2v cos(θ)
c
f0
(2)
where f is called the Doppler shift, v is the obstacle velocity
magnitude, and θ is the angle between the obstacle velocity
direction and the radar line of sight.
The algorithm that we will present in the following makes
use of both distance and velocity measurements to estimate
vehicle ego velocity. In our work, these measurements are
provided by an MIMO FMCW radar, which further allows
us to use the beamforming techniques presented next.
B. MIMO Beamforming
MIMO radars employ an antenna array of transceivers and
receiver, which makes it possible to use beamforming to
digitally orient the radar’s line of sight and FOV in a speciﬁc
area of its environment. In Fig. 1, we represent a simple
MIMO1 radar with a linear array consisting in one transmitting
antenna (TX) and two receiving antennas (RX1 and RX2).
1More precisely, SIMO in this case.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
2686
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2023
Fig. 2.
Conﬁguration UAV-mounted radar and corresponding Doppler
spectrum.
The wave emitted by the TX antenna will be reﬂected by
the ground and returned to the RX antennas with an incident
angle θ. Because of the distance between the RX antennas, the
signal received by the RX2 antenna must travel an additional
distance d sin(θ) compared with the one received on the
RX1 antenna. This implies a phase shift between the two
received signals, which is φd(θ) = (2π)/λd sin(θ). For a
linear antenna array consisting of NTX transmitting antennas
and NRX receiving antennas, there are n = NTX × NRX virtual
channels sk(t) with k = 1, . . . , n for which the relative phase
shift is [φd(θ); 2φd(θ); . . .; nφd(θ)].
We call beamforming the fact to virtually orient the line of
sight of the radar in order to obtain a signal sθ(t) correspond-
ing to the signal received by the radar for an incident angle θ.
To do this, we sum the sk(t) signals received on each channel
of the radar with a correction term pk(θ) corresponding to the
phase shift induced by the angle θ [23]
sθ(t) =
n

k=1
sk(t)pk(θ) =
n

k=1
sk(t)e j(k−1) 2π
λ d sin(θ)
(3)
where
pk(θ) = e j(k−1) 2π
λ d sin(θ) = e j(k−1)φd(θ),
k ∈[1, . . . , n].
(4)
We will apply this principle in the following to measure
simultaneously the height and the velocity of an UAV accord-
ing to the axes⃗x and⃗z using the signals received on the
channels of a single MIMO radar.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND RELATED WORK
Consider a radar ﬁxed on an UAV, itself at a height h and
a velocity v with respect to the ground along the⃗x axis.
A radar mounted on the drone has an FOV whose line of
sight intersects the ground, assumed horizontal, at a distance
R and with an angle θ0 as represented in Fig. 2.
The radar emits a wave of carrier frequency f0, which is
reﬂected by the random asperities of the ground. The signal
received by the radar has a frequency f , which is related
to the velocity v of the UAV by (2). The received signal
is then demodulated to form a new signal called the beat
signal, noted sb, whose carrier frequency corresponds to the
Doppler shift f = f −f0 [24], [25], [26]. The objective
of a ground velocity measurement algorithm is to correctly
determine the frequency f from the signal sb. This can
be done by calculating the power spectral density Ssb( f ) of
the signal sb and by detecting its maximum, which should
be located at f . However, the problem is that this power
spectral density Ssb( f ) does not only contain a peak at f ,
but is spread out in frequencies. This is due both to the noise
contained in the sb(t) signal and to the large number of echos
due to the antenna aperture angle noted γ (Fig. 2).
Related contributions on velocity estimation from radar
measurements are focused on the use of CW radars, which do
not provide a distance measurement. These works from the
literature can be broken down into two types of approaches.
The ﬁrst one consists in determining f under the assumption
that Ssb( f ) follows a Gaussian distribution of expectation
f , and that the power will, therefore, be maximal at this
frequency [20], [21], [27]. However, as the signal is noisy,
extracting directly the frequency f from the spectrum may
not be very accurate [27]. The second approach consists in
comparing Ssb( f ) to several power spectral densities pre-
computed as a function of the antenna aperture γ and for
several velocities v, in order to search for the best correlation
[28], [29]. This method gives better results with respect to
the previous one, but its computational cost is higher [21].
There are other related works based on FMCW radar, such as
[30] and [31]. The approach from [31] consists in averaging
the values of f obtained along the radar FOV using a
threshold, which can easily fail when there is a low signal
over noise ratio. Klein et al. [30] proposed an approach
based on an omnidirectional radar and synthetic aperture array
(SAR) method, which performs well both in simulation and
experimentally, although it requires a signiﬁcant amount of
computations, which would make it difﬁcult to embark on
a micro-UAV processor, such as the one of the BitCraze
Crazyﬂie.
Our approach is related to the work of [28] in the sense that
we exploit the antenna aperture γ to calculate the velocity of
the UAV. However, rather than calculating intercorrelations,
which is computationally costly, our approach is based on the
slicing of the radar FOV into a set of rays from which we
can obtain several redundant measurements of v simultane-
ously, and then average them to smooth errors related to the
measurement noise.
IV. EGO-VELOCITY ESTIMATION ALGORITHM
In this section, we present our algorithm for estimating
the horizontal velocity of an UAV equipped with a radar,
as shown in Fig. 2. We ﬁrst present a solution for the case
where the radar height h is known. Then, we present a solution
to estimate simultaneously v and h. In both cases, we consider
that the geometric parameter θ0, the radar angle of sight,
is known. Indeed, we can consider this hypothesis valid, since
we know the angle with which the radar is ﬁxed on the UAV
by construction and since the angle of inclination of the UAV
itself can be obtained with its inertial measurement unit (IMU).
Under the hypothesis of a horizontal ground, the radar angle
of sight θ0 is, thus, the sum of these two angles.
A. Horizontal Velocity Estimation With Known
Radar Height
We ﬁrst consider a situation of a known radar height
h. This corresponds, for example, to the case in which
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
BARRA et al.: MICRO-DRONE EGO-VELOCITY AND HEIGHT ESTIMATION IN GPS-DENIED ENVIRONMENTS
2687
Fig. 3. Example M ( Δf, R ) matrix from FMCW radar measurement.
a distance-to-ground sensor is mounted on the UAV. Note that
the algorithm from this section works both for SISO and
MIMO FMCW radars; hence, we will not specify the radar
type in the following.
As stated previously, we use a radar, which has an FOV with
a beam angle noted γ . The radar outputs a matrix M(f, R)
which gives the Doppler shift f perceived in the FOV as a
function of the radial distance R between the radar and the
ground. We show, in Fig. 3, the typical shape of a matrix
M(f, R) obtained when the radar is translating horizontally
with respect to the ground, with the Doppler shift f of the
received signal showed on the vertical axis, the radial distance
R on the horizontal axis, and the power on the third component
(in color). This matrix M(f, R) will be used to estimate the
velocity v as explained below.
1) Slicing the FOV: As shown in Fig. 3 (top), we slice the
FOV of the radar into a set of N rays, which intersect the
ground with an angle θRi ∈[θ0 −(γ/2), θ0 + (γ/2)] at a
distance Ri given by
Ri =
h
sin

θRi
,
i = {1, . . . , N}.
(5)
From (2), we can express the Doppler shift fRi perceived
on each ray of length Ri as follows:
fRi = 2v cos θRi

c
f0.
(6)
After selecting N rays of length Ri, our ego-vehicle velocity
estimation algorithm uses the output of the radar M(f, R)
combined with (6) to obtain N measurements of v by extract-
ing N values of fRi as explained hereafter.
2) Extracting ΔfRi From M (Δf, R): As we can see in Fig. 2,
the Doppler frequencies are spread along the vertical axis,
which implies that we do not obtain a unique value of fRi
for a given ray length Ri. The reason for this spread is the
opening angle γ of the FOV, which is represented in Fig. 4
in the (O;⃗x;⃗y) plane. Indeed, we observe in Fig. 4 that
the velocity vector⃗v is projected along several directions for
Fig. 4. Bird’s eye view of the radar’s FOV.
the same distance Ri. At point A, the norm of the projected
velocity vector reaches a maximum and corresponds to the
value fRi given by (6), while the norm of the velocity
projected at point B will be lower. The value fRi interesting
us is the one located at point A, i.e., the one located on the top
contour of the power spectrum at distance Ri, noted SRi ( f ).
To obtain fRi , we need to calculate the derivative of SRi ( f )
with respect to f and to take the index of the maximum of
the result, a basic technique for contour detection, which is
sufﬁcient here [32].
3) Final Algorithm: The complete algorithm for estimating
the horizontal velocity of the radar with respect to ground is
given in Algorithm 1. First, for i = {1, . . ., N}, knowing the
FOV aperture angle γ and the inclination angle θ0 of the radar,
we compute the incidence angle θRi of the ray i. Second,
knowing h, we compute its length Ri. Third, we detect the
contour of the Doppler spectrum at the distance Ri to obtain
fRi , and then, we obtain the velocity measurement along ray
i noted vRi using (6). Finally, we average vRi from each ray i
in order to smooth measurement noise and to obtain the ﬁnal
velocity v estimation. More advanced fusion methods, such as
least-squares approximation, could be used in order to enhance
the noise smoothing process.
Algorithm 1 Horizontal Ground Velocity Estimation
for i ∈{1, . . . , N} do
θRi = θ0 + 2i−N
2N .γ
▷Compute angle between ground and ray i
Ri =
h
sin(θRi )
▷Find associated ray length
fRi = arg(max f (
dSRi ( f )
d f
))
▷Detect Doppler spectrum contour
vRi =
cfRi
2 f0 cos(θRi )
▷Find associated radial velocity
end for
v = average (vRi ) for i ∈{1, . . . , N}
▷Final velocity estimation
Note that the previous algorithm is based on the assumption
that the ground is ﬂat. If this does not hold true, then the
velocity obtained from the algorithm will be biased, because
the Doppler shift f will be evaluated at the wrong range
Ri. To mitigate this error on the ray length, θ0 should be high
enough (we used θ0 = 45◦), so small angle variations of the
ground have a limited effect in (5). Moreover, the fact that we
average the velocities obtained from virtual rays intersecting
the ground at different places also helps to reduce the effects
of local ground angle variations.
B. Both Horizontal Velocity and Radar Height Estimation
In Section IV-A, we presented an algorithm to esti-
mate the horizontal velocity of an UAV equipped with
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
2688
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2023
Fig. 5.
Virtual beam orientations for simultaneous measurement of
height and velocity. Example of resulting Doppler matrices.
a radar along⃗x, assuming that the radar height h is known.
Here, we extend the previous work by relying on an MIMO
FMCW radar to get free from the assumption that h is known.
Indeed, we show that it is possible to estimate with a single
MIMO radar both the velocity along⃗x and the height h using
the beamforming technique. Note that we will also show that
the same idea could be used to determine the vertical velocity
along the axis⃗z. This contribution is of particular interest in
the case of an UAV application where we wish to limit the
number of sensors, and therefore, we wish to avoid the need
for a dedicated distance-to-ground sensor.
The outputs of an MIMO radar at each time step are n
Doppler matrices Mk(f, R) with k = {1, . . ., n}, corre-
sponding to the signal received on the n virtual channels
associated with a pair of TX and RX antennas, as explained
in Section II-B. Using these n matrices and the beamforming
technique, we can apply (3) with sk = Mk(f, R) to obtain
a single matrix Mθ(f, R), which corresponds to the radar
measurement along the angular line of sight θ.
To estimate the radar height h and horizontal velocity v,
we need two virtual beams, as shown in Fig. 5. One beam is
virtually oriented to the vertical to the ground, and another
beam is oriented to an angle θ0 with respect to the ground.
Let θUAV and θmount be, respectively, the inclination angle of
the UAV given by its inertial unit and the angle with which
the radar is ﬁxed on the UAV by construction. The inclination
angle of the radar line of sight θLOS is then
θLOS = θUAV + θmount.
(7)
Note that when the UAV is hovering stationary as in Fig. 5,
we have θUAV = 0◦, and the radar mount on the UAV is such
that θLOS = θ0. The estimation of h and v is then explained
below.
1) Height Estimation: The ﬁrst beam is oriented vertically
to have an angle of the radar line of sight of 90◦with the
ground. To counter the motion of the UAV and the inclination
Fig. 6.
Conﬁguration of virtually oriented radar beams. Left: two virtual
beams generated by radar 1.
angle of the radar mount, we obtain the vertical beam by
applying a phase shift of 90◦−θLOS to the n virtual channels
of the radar. This gives a matrix M(90◦−θLOS)(f, R) shown
in Fig. 5 (bottom left). Then, the estimation of h consists in
extracting the index of the maximum power value of matrix
M(90◦−θLOS)(f, R) at f = 0 Hz.
Note that it is also possible to estimate vertical velocity
along⃗z at this point, by detecting the contour of the Doppler
spectrum SR=h for the range R = h to ﬁnd fR=h, which
gives the vertical velocity v⃗z = c/(2. f0).fR=h.
2) Velocity Estimation: The horizontal velocity v can be
estimated similarly as in Section IV, through the virtual beam
having an angle θ0 between the line of sight of the radar
and the ground. To this end, we obtain this virtual beam by
applying a phase shift of −θUAV to the n virtual channels of the
radar to have θLOS = θ0. This gives a matrix M−θUAV(f, R)
shown in Fig. 5 (bottom right), which is then used to estimate
horizontal velocity with Algorithm 1. These contributions
will be illustrated below by simulation results and real-world
experiments.
V. SIMULATIONS
In this section, we show a validation of our approach
based on a simulation framework combining both real-world
measurements and a dedicated radar simulator.
A. Simulation Framework
Our objective is to build a simulation framework to validate
our algorithms in an environment including both real-world
and simulated data. The simulation environment is a complete
radar system simulator, which has already been tested and used
to design new radar systems and signal processing algorithms;
see, e.g., [33]. The internal functional blocks of the radar
and the interaction of the emitted waves with the external
environment are modeled mathematically. To initialize the
simulator, the characteristics of the radar must be speciﬁed,
including bandwidth B, carrier frequency f0, and the number
of antennas. Our simulation protocol then includes the follow-
ing steps.
Step 1: The ﬁrst step consists in conducting real-world tests
ﬂight with an UAV Crazyﬂie from BitCraze [7] equipped with
an inertial unit able to estimate the drone’s attitude and a
Vicon motion capture system recording the drone’s altitude
and velocity in 3-D.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
BARRA et al.: MICRO-DRONE EGO-VELOCITY AND HEIGHT ESTIMATION IN GPS-DENIED ENVIRONMENTS
2689
Fig. 7. Estimation of h and ΔfRi on Doppler matrices from radar 1.
Step 2: We build a simulation model of an UAV equipped
with two MIMO FMCW radars shown in Fig. 6, to be able,
later on, to estimate the drone’s altitude and velocity in 3-D
using the proposed radar signal processing algorithms. The
attitude, altitude, and 3-D velocity parameters of this model
are those obtained in step 1.
Step 3: This model is injected in our proprietary radar sim-
ulation environment to obtain simulated radar data, emulating
those that would have been recorded had these radars been
mounted on the drone. The output of the simulator is the n
virtual channels Doppler matrices from each radar.
Step 4: Our velocity and height estimation algorithms are
applied to the simulated Doppler matrices, and the resulting
estimates are compared with those recorded in step 1.
B. Simulation Parameters
We consider the use of two radars on the drone, as repre-
sented in Fig. 6. Radar 1 is used to simultaneously estimate
velocity along the axes⃗x and⃗z as well as the elevation h by
applying the beamforming principle to generate two virtual
beams, as explained in Section IV-B. Radar 2 is used to
estimate the velocity along⃗y, again with the beamforming
technique, which allows to counteract the varying attitude of
the UAV to generate an oblique virtual beam.
We provide the simulator with the speciﬁcations of the
radar, which will be used in the real-world experiments of
Section VI: f0 = 77 GHz, B = 4 GHz, 2TX, 4RX, γ = 60◦,
and which correspond to the radar [34]. The simulator gener-
ates the n = 2 × 4 = 8 Doppler matrices corresponding to the
eight virtual channels of each radar at a rate of 500 Hz.
C. Simulation Results
We show, in Fig. 7, the Doppler matrices obtained at an
arbitrary simulation time step after beamforming with radar 1.
The red circles on the matrix represent the contour of the
spectrum, i.e., the fRi detected for each Ri ray. The number
of rays Ri to consider is set to N = 20, which is sufﬁcient
considering the range resolution of the radar and the maximum
distance R of the Doppler matrix ﬁxed at 4 m. Indeed, for the
maximum value of h, which is 1.3 m here, some rays from the
FOV are not assigned, because they correspond to distances R,
Fig. 8. Estimated velocity and height compared with reference.
Fig. 9. Experimental setup including MIMO radar and IMU.
which exceed the maximum distance. A mechanism of exclu-
sion of measurements associated with these unassigned rays
is provided in addition to Algorithm 1 in order not to bias
the ﬁnal velocity estimate. Fig. 8 shows that the resulting
estimated velocity and height obtained using the simulated
radar data coincide well with the reference signals obtained
from the motion capture system.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We now perform experiments to validate the velocity and
height estimation algorithm with a real radar. It was not
possible to directly mount the radar on the Crazyﬂie micro-
drone because of the complexity of powering and interfac-
ing the radar on such a small platform. Experiments were
performed with an automotive grade millimeter-wave MIMO
FMCW radar [34] with a carrier frequency of 77 GHz (2TX,
4RX). The radar is interfaced with a computer through its
debugging environment in order to record the Doppler matrices
from the eight virtual channels to perform velocity and height
estimation ofﬂine. We connect to an Arduino board an IMU
Bosch BNO055, which estimates its attitude using a Madgwick
ﬁlter [35]. The IMU axes⃗yIMU and⃗zIMU coincide with the
radar antenna plane, and⃗xIMU is aligned with the line of sight
of the radar, so the attitude returned by the IMU corresponds to
the one of the radar. The data logged to the computer through
the Arduino board for the IMU and through the debugging
interface for the radar are then recorded simultaneously at
a frequency of 10 Hz, which is the maximum that can be
obtained through the radar debugging environment interface
not intended for this purpose. The sensors are shown in
Fig. 9 (right).
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.7]
2690
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2023
Fig. 10. Experiment A: constant velocity, h ≈1.2 m.
During the experiments, a person is walking while holding
the radar in front of herself, keeping it in a relatively stable
position, and following a straight line of 30 m identiﬁed
by a mark on the ground. The time-stamped position of the
person is recorded via a smartphone GPS with the ©Android
©GeoTracker application, and the velocity is obtained be
deriving these position points. Note that the IMU and radar
measurements are recorded at the same time on the computer
and are, therefore, synchronized, while the GPS data are
recorded on the smartphone and are desynchronized from the
sensor data. It will be possible to compare the sensors data
with the GPS data by synchronizing them using a detection of
the rising edge of the velocity and the timestamps. However,
this comparison will be only visual because of this temporal
uncertainty and the fact that the GPS points are recorded by
the smartphone very sporadically over time.
We set up three types of experiments to validate the velocity
and height radar-based estimations. Each experiment starts
with an initial period lasting from 15 to 20 s in which there
is no movement. Then, the person walks at constant velocity
and holding the radar at a constant height, with a sudden
change in velocity in experiment B and a sudden change in
elevation in experiment C. In addition to the visual valida-
tion through superimposition of the velocity estimation with
the GPS velocity measurement, the horizontal displacement
velocity obtained with the radar is integrated over time to
compare the distance obtained at the end of the experiment
with the theoretical distance of 30 m. We observe the results
of experiments A–C, respectively, in Figs. 10–12.
From these results, we can make the following observations.
First, concerning the velocity estimation, Fig. 10 shows a good
match with the GPS measurements. One can also observe in
Fig. 11 that the change of pace at 15 m is well perceived by
the radar velocity estimation algorithm.
In Fig. 12, we note that the velocity measurement is noisier
with h ≈1, 8 m than when h ≈1, 2 m. This can be explained
by the fact that part of the FOV of the radar is not exploited in
the ﬁrst case. Indeed, because of the limited communication
interface bandwidth in our experimental setup, the Doppler
arrays are transmitted to the computer for radial distances
only up to 4 m. However, when the radar is held at an
elevation of h = 2 m and for an angle θ0 of 30◦, we have
R = 2/ sin(π/6) = 4 m. Thus, half of the FOV corresponding
Fig. 11. Experiment B: low then high velocity after 15 m, h ≈1.2 m.
Fig. 12.
Experiment C: constant velocity, h ≈1.8 m; then, h ≈1.2 m
after 15 m.
TABLE I
FINAL DISTANCE DURING EXPERIMENT A
to θRi
∈[θ0; θ0 + (γ/2)] is not used by the algorithm,
which causes a noisier ﬁnal velocity estimation. We can
note that this height limitation would be problematic for an
UAV application requiring the drone to ﬂy at altitudes higher
than 2 m. However, this is due to our scarce experimental setup
resources, and a dedicated radar-UAV interface allowing the
transmission of Doppler arrays for radial distances higher than
4 m would solve the problem.
From the point of view of the distance traveled, we can
observe in Figs. 10–12 (middle), the one obtained by integrat-
ing the velocity measurement of the radar corresponds well
to the theoretical distance of 30 m, for all three experiments.
To verify this, ten experiments of type A were performed.
We gather the ﬁnal distance values obtained on these ten
experiments in Table I. The values obtained are close to the
expected 30 m, with an average distance of 29.61 m and a
standard deviation of 1.01 m. If we also consider the fact that
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.8]
BARRA et al.: MICRO-DRONE EGO-VELOCITY AND HEIGHT ESTIMATION IN GPS-DENIED ENVIRONMENTS
2691
there is an uncertainty due to the experimental setup concern-
ing the exact start and ﬁnish locations, we can conclude that
the velocity measurement via the radar is accurate.
Concerning the elevation
estimation, we
can
see
in
Figs. 10 and 11 that we obtain, in average, 1.3 m, which
was the height at which we tried to maintain the radar while
walking. In Fig. 12, the height difference is well marked, and
we can observe the ﬁrst value of 1.8 m; then, the second at
1.3 m corresponding correctly to experiment C.
Finally, Figs. 10–12 show an important beneﬁt of radar-
based speed estimation, which is the absence of bias in
the speed estimation, and more precisely, the good detection
of immobile phases, such as before and after the person,
is moving. This contrasts well with the speed, which would be
obtained through the time integration of accelerometer data,
which would be increasingly biased due to the accumulation
of erroneous data, such as noise.
VII. CONCLUSION
This work presents an algorithm to estimate the ego velocity
of an UAV with respect to the ground using an FMCW radar.
We then extend this algorithm because of the use of an MIMO
FMCW radar, which allows to apply a beamforming technique
to simultaneously estimate the UAV height and velocity in both
the horizontal and vertical directions.
These algorithms were ﬁrst validated in a radar environ-
ment simulation platform fed with real-world measurements,
which served both as model inputs and ground truths. These
simulations conﬁrmed the accuracy of the velocity and height
estimation and the validity of the approach. Finally, real-world
experiments were conducted using an Inﬁneon 77 GHz FMCW
MIMO radar. These experiments not only demonstrated the
validity of the approach but also showed excellent performance
of the velocity estimation, on the order of 3 cm per meter
traveled.
Further work will consist in the integration of an MIMO
FMCW radar on the Crazyﬂie UAV, to validate the approach
experimentally with in-ﬂight data. Moreover, in our approach,
we use an MIMO radar with a linear antenna array, which
make it possible to apply the principle of digital beamforming
in a plane. This work could be extended to the use of an
MIMO radar with a 2-D planar antenna array, which would
allow to carry out the beamforming in a 3-D space [36],
allowing the simultaneous estimation of the UAV velocity in
three dimensions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. R. Murphy, Disaster Robotics. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press,
2014.
[2] M. Martínez-Díaz and F. Soriguera, “Autonomous vehicles: Theoretical
and practical challenges,” Transp. Res. Proc., vol. 33, pp. 275–282,
Jan. 2018.
[3] S. Lesecq et al., “INSPEX: Design and integration of a portable/wearable
smart spatial exploration system,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur.
Conf. Exhib. (DATE), 2017, pp. 746–751.
[4] C. Fischer and H. Gellersen, “Location and navigation support for
emergency responders: A survey,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 38–47, Jan. 2010.
[5] C. Brothier, A. Vacque, and D. Boldo, “Civil engineering inspections
on nuclear sites by drone,” in Proc. 24th Conf. Struct. Mech. Reactor
Technol., 2017, pp. 3434–3440.
[6] P. Tosato, D. Facinelli, M. Prada, L. Gemma, M. Rossi, and D. Brunelli,
“An autonomous swarm of drones for industrial gas sensing applica-
tions,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Symp. World Wireless, Mobile Multimedia
Netw., Jun. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[7] BitCraze Crafylie 2.1. Accessed: Oct. 1, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bitcraze.io/products/crazyﬂie-2-1/
[8] D. H. Titterton and J. L. Weston, Strapdown Inertial Navigation Tech-
nology, vol. 17, 2nd ed. Edison, NJ, USA: IET, 2004.
[9] M. Bangura, X. Hou, G. Allibert, R. Mahony, and N. Michael, “Supervi-
sory control of multirotor vehicles in challenging conditions using iner-
tial measurements,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1490–1501,
Dec. 2018.
[10] O. Dunkley, J. Engel, J. Sturm, and D. Cremers, “Visual-inertial naviga-
tion for a camera-equipped 25g nano-quadrotor,” in Proc. IROS Aerial
Open Source Robotics Workshop, 2014, pp. 1–2.
[11] K. McGuire, G. de Croon, C. D. Wagter, K. Tuyls, and H. Kappen,
“Efﬁcient optical ﬂow and stereo vision for velocity estimation and
obstacle avoidance on an autonomous pocket drone,” IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1070–1076, Apr. 2017.
[12] M. J. Veth, “Navigation using images, a survey of techniques,” Naviga-
tion, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 127–139, 2011.
[13] R. Opromolla, G. Fasano, G. Ruﬁno, M. Grassi, and A. Savvaris,
“LIDAR-inertial integration for UAV localization and mapping in com-
plex environments,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Unmanned Aircr. Syst., 2016,
pp. 649–656.
[14] V. Grabe, H. H. Bülthoff, D. Scaramuzza, and P. R. Giordano, “Nonlinear
ego-motion estimation from optical ﬂow for online control of a quadrotor
UAV,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 1114–1135, 2015.
[15] L. Narula, P. A. Iannucci, and T. E. Humphreys, “All-weather sub-50-cm
radar-inertial positioning,” 2020, arXiv:2009.04814.
[16] (2021). Texas Instruments IWR6843AOP Datasheet. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ti.com/lit/pdf/swrs237
[17] Silicon Radar. (2021). 120 GHz Transceiver T R A120002 Datasheet.
[Online]. Available: https://siliconradar.com/datasheets/Datasheet_TRA
_120_002_V0.8.pdf
[18] A. F. Scannapieco, A. Renga, G. Fasano, and A. Moccia, “Ultralight
radar sensor for autonomous operations by micro-UAS,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Unmanned Aircr. Syst., 2016, pp. 727–735.
[19] X. Gao, S. Roy, and G. Xing, “MIMO-SAR: A hierarchical high-
resolution imaging algorithm for mmWave FMCW radar in autonomous
driving,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 7322–7334,
Aug. 2021.
[20] F. B. Berger, “The nature of Doppler velocity measurement,” IRE Trans.
Aeronaut. Navigat. Electron., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 103–112, 1957.
[21] K. K. M. Shariff, E. Hoare, L. Daniel, M. Antoniou, and M. Cherniakov,
“Comparison of adaptive spectral estimation for vehicle speed measure-
ment with radar sensors,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 4, p. 751, 2017.
[22] S. M. Patole, M. Torlak, D. Wang, and M. Ali, “Automotive radars:
A review of signal processing techniques,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag.,
vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 22–35, Mar. 2017.
[23] J. R. Guerci, Space-Time Adaptive Processing for Radar, 2nd ed.
Norwood, MA, USA: Artech House, 2014.
[24] M. Kronauge and H. Rohling, “New chirp sequence radar waveform,”
IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 2870–2877,
Oct. 2014.
[25] S. Lutz, D. Ellenrieder, T. Walter, and R. Weigel, “On fast chirp
modulations and compressed sensing for automotive radar applications,”
in Proc. 15th Int. Radar Symp. (IRS), 2014, pp. 1–6.
[26] J. Barra, “Estimation embarquée du mouvement sans informations
d’infrastructure:
Application à un drone autonome,” M.S. thesis,
Université Lyon, Lyon, France, 2022.
[27] J. Dybedal, “Doppler radar velocity measurement based on a 24 GHz
radar sensor,” M.S. thesis, Faculty Inf. Technol., Math. Elect. Eng.,
Dept. Electron. Telecommun., Norwegian Univ. Sci. Technol. (NTNU),
Trondheim, Norway, 2013.
[28] W. Kleinhempel, W. Stammler, and D. Bergmann, “Radar signal
processing for vehicle velocity measurements,” in Signal Processing.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1992, pp. 1825–1828.
[29] A. Egawa, “A microwave Doppler radar velocity meter for construction
machinery,” SAE Trans., vol. 91, pp. 3404–3423, Jan. 1982.
[30] K. T. J. Klein, F. Uysal, M. C. Cuenca, M. P. Otten, and J. J. de Wit,
“Radar-aided navigation system for small drones in GPS-denied envi-
ronments,” in Proc. IEEE Radar Conf. (RadarConf), May 2021, pp. 1–6.
[31] S. Zahran, M. M. Mostafa, A. Masiero, A. M. Moussa, A. Vettore, and
N. El-Sheimy, “Micro-radar and UWB aided UAV navigation in GNSS
denied environment,” Int. Arch. Photogramm., Remote Sens. Spatial Inf.
Sci., 2018.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.9]
2692
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 23, NO. 3, 1 FEBRUARY 2023
[32] L. S. Davis, “A survey of edge detection techniques,” Comput. Graph.
Image Process., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 248–270, 1975.
[33] E. Antide, M. Zarudniev, O. Michel, and M. Pelissier, “Comparative
study of radar architectures for human vital signs measurement,” in Proc.
IEEE Radar Conf. (RadarConf), Sep. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[34] Inﬁneon
Technologies.
(2021).
(Preliminary).
Radar
Sensors
for
automotive.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.inﬁneon.com/cms/en/
applications/automotive/chassis-safety-and-adas/automotive-77-ghz-
radar-system/
[35] S. Madgwick, “An efﬁcient orientation ﬁlter for inertial and iner-
tial/magnetic
sensor
arrays,”
Rep.
X-io
Univ.
Bristol,
vol.
25,
pp. 113–118, Apr. 2010.
[36] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, 4th ed. Hoboken,
NJ, USA: Wiley, 2016.
Jeremy Barra received the B.E. degree from the École catholique des
arts et métiers (ECAM) Lyon, Lyon, France, in 2017, the master’s degree
in control engineering from the École Centrale de Lyon, Lyon, in 2018,
and the Ph.D. degree in control engineering from the Université de Lyon,
Lyon, in 2022.
He is a signal processing engineer in the private sector in the ﬁeld of
transportation. His research interests include the autonomous navigation
of mobile robots in GPS-denied environments.
Thierry Creuzet, photograph and biography not available at the time of
publication.
Suzanne Lesecq received Agrégation degree in electrical engineering
from the Ecole Normale Supérieure de Paris-Saclay (ENS), France,
in 1992, and the Ph.D. degree in process control from the Grenoble
Institute of Technology, France, in 1997. She joined the University
of Grenoble, France, in 1997, where she has been appointed as an
Associate-Professor from 1998 to 2006 and full-time Professor from 2006
to 2009. She joined CEA-LETI in mid-2009 where she worked on power
management of multi-processor platforms and of embedded systems,
then on Bayesian data fusion for environment perception with application
to the automotive domain and to the white cane for Visually Impaired
and Blind people. She has a Recipient of the French prize “les Etoiles de
l’Europe” for the coordination of the H2020 INSPEX project. Since April
2021, she has been in charge of EU programs for the system division in
CEA-Leti. Her research interests include data fusion techniques together
with their robust implementation on computing devices, with a particular
focus on the agri-food sector and environment perception.
Gerard Scorletti received the Engineering degree from École nationale
supérieure de techniques avancées (ENSTA), France, and the Ph.D.
degree in automatic control from the University of Orsay, France, in 1997.
From 1997 to 1998, he was a Research Associate at the Catholic
University of Louvain, Belgium. From 1998 to 2007, he was a Assistant
Professor of electrical engineering at the University of Caen Basse-
Normandie, France. He is a Professor of automatic control and signal
processing with the École Centrale de Lyon, France, with a permanent
joint appointment with the Ampère Laboratory (Team Automatic Control
and Mechatronics, Department of Methods for System Engineering).His
research interests in automatic control include analysis and control of
uncertain systems using convex optimisation with their applications to
engineering.
Eric Blanco received the Ph.D. degree in automatic and signal process-
ing from University Claude Bernard - Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France, in
2002. His thesis was focused on problems of deconvolution for uncertain
systems in LAGEP Laboratory.
In 2003, he obtained a chair as a lecturer at Ecole Centrale de Lyon
and AMPERE laboratory. His research has been focused on diagnosis
and prognosis. Today, his research activity includes diagnosis, estimation
and prediction for complex systems and he manages the Professor Team
in Automatic Control and Signal Processing of Ecole Centrale de Lyon.
Mykhailo Zarudniev received the M.S. degree from the National Tech-
nical University of Ukraine, Kiev Polytechnic Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine, in
2008, and the Ph.D. degree in automatic control from Lyon University,
France, in January 2013.
He is currently a Research Engineer with CEA-LETI, France. His
research interests focused on highly efﬁcient RF systems for spectral
sensing and radar applications.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 17:36:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
