warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0647.pdf
sha256: 76537BDF1C8F5B162949E96B636AA98CEB1ED588EDABC6E71768BC707F2C359D
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 8
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Radiation Source Localization in GPS–denied Environments
using Aerial Robots
Frank Mascarich1, Taylor Wilson2, Christos Papachristos3, and Kostas Alexis4
Abstract— This paper details the system and methods de-
veloped to enable autonomous nuclear radiation source lo-
calization and mapping using aerial robots in GPS–denied
environments. A Thallium-doped Cesium Iodide (CsI(Tl)) scin-
tillator and a Silicon Photomultiplier are combined with
custom–built electronics for counting and spectroscopy, and
the provided radiation measurements are pose–annotated using
visual–inertial localization enabling autonomous operation in
GPS–denied environments. Provided this capability, a strategy
for radioactive source localization, as well as active source
search path planning was developed. The proposed method is
motivated and accounts for the limited endurance of the vehicle,
which entails a very small amount of dwell points, and the fact
that GPS–denied localization implies varying uncertainty of the
robot’s position estimate. The complete system is evaluated in
multiple experimental studies using a small aerial robot and a
Cesium-137 radiation source. As shown, accurate radioactive
source localization is achieved, enabling efﬁcient radiation
mapping of indoor GPS–denied environments.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nuclear sites, active, decomissioned, or scheduled for
decomissioning, represent major assets and critical facilities
requiring rigorous, systematic and comprehensive inspection
that necessitate radiometric surveying. Examples include the
nuclear enrichment and waste storage facilities of the Man-
hattan Project, active nuclear power stations, and the sites of
nuclear disaster. Robotized nuclear site inspection ensures
the safety of personnel, advances the systematicity of the
inspection process, enables repeatable monitoring missions,
facilitates access in highly radioactive environments, and
allows rapid and comprehensive search at low cost.
In the literature multiple efforts can be identiﬁed, largely
based on automatically guided or teleoperated ground
robots [1–3], unmanned aerial vehicles operating in open–
ended GPS–supported environments [1, 4], underwater robots
for pipe inspection [5] and more. Despite the signiﬁcant
progress and pioneering efforts of the community, reliable
robotic autonomy and information gathering in the complex,
cluttered, often highly contaminated and GPS–denied nuclear
sites remains particularly challenging. Iconic examples are
the “sarcophagus” of Chernobyl’s Unit 4, the recent efforts
to inspect the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant, and
the need to inspect the nuclear waste storage facilities at the
Hanford Site.
This material is based upon work supported by the Department of Energy
under Award Number [DE-EM0004478].
1,3,4 The authors are with the Autonomous Robots Lab, Univer-
sity of Nevada, Reno, 1664 N. Virginia, 89557, Reno, NV, USA
fmascarich@nevada.unr.edu
2 The author is with the Wilson Laboratory for Radiation Physics,
University of Nevada, Reno, 1664 N. Virginia, 89557, Reno, NV, USA
Fig. 1. Instance of experiment for autonomous active search and radioactive
source localization using a small aerial robot integrating a miniaturized
CsI(Tl) scintillator operating in a GPS–denied environment.
This work contributes the system design and algorithmic
solutions to enable small aerial robots to conduct autonomous
radiation detection, source localization, 3D/radiation map-
ping, and active source–seeking behavior in indoor, GPS–
denied environments. A miniature Thallium-doped Cesium
Iodide (CsI(Tl)) scintillator combined with a Silicon Photo-
multiplier (SiPM) allows radiation measurement and detec-
tion and is interfaced through an in–house designed counting
and spectroscopy circuit. Its data are combined with the
localization estimates of a visual–inertial localization and
mapping unit to derive pose–annotated radiation measure-
ments in GPS–denied areas.
Due to the limited endurance of small aerial robots and the
need for long dwelling times to allow the radiation counting
statistics to provide reliable estimates, a source localization
method tailored to operate with a very limited number of
measurements is developed. The proposed method further
exploits the fact that the robot derives a volumetric occu-
pancy map of its environment in real–time which enables to
a) constrain the problem of source localization (considering
solid sources), b) better handle the existence of objects
with materials that attenuate the radiation levels (shielding),
and also c) develop a volumetric map of the environment
annotated with expected radiation intensity levels. Finally,
precisely due to the necessarily small number of radiation
measurements, an active source localization informative path
planning strategy in environments for which no prior map is
available is developed. The overall system and methods are
evaluated in experimental studies using a small aerial robot
and real radiation sources.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
May 21-25, 2018, Brisbane, Australia
978-1-5386-3081-5/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
6537
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:09:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
Section II provides an overview of related work, while
the developed radiation detection and mapping sensor unit
is presented in III. The proposed source localization and
active source–seeking algorithms are detailed in Section IV,
followed by experimental evaluation in Section V. Finally,
conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
The topic of radiological source localization has been
studied through a set of contributions including those in [6–
10]. Among them, maximum likelihood estimation is utilized
in [7, 8, 10], numerical adjoints in conjunction to a bayesian
formulation are used in [6], while a particle ﬁlter is employed
in [7]. In all of these strategies, a large number of sensor
measurements per iteration of the localization method is
required. Typically these radiation measurements are con-
sidered to be provided by a ﬁxed array of sensors. Aiming
to address the questions of sensor deployment and multi–
robot guidance, the works in [11, 12] present a framework
for relevant information–gathering tasks. Active source (e.g.
radiological, chemical) localization has been studied in [13–
15]. Sequential testing theory is utilized in [16, 17]. In the
speciﬁc ﬁeld of nuclearized robotics, a set of works [1,
2, 4, 18–21] have presented interesting results. The authors
in [18] describe a distributed guidance strategy by means of
information gradients to estimate the distribution of radiation
and tested their method using light as a “radiation analog”
source. The works in [19, 21] aim to handle multiple sources
and evaluate their method in simulation. The authors in [1]
employ semantic scene segmentation based on aerial robotic
data in order to better inform the information gathering
trajectories of a ground robot (and broadly an aerial-ground
robot team). The work in [20] uses an RMAX helicopter
to map radiation over large environments. The contribution
in [4] refers to post–disaster radiation mapping also using
an RMAX helicopter combined with a grid–based Bayesian
estimator for single source localization and contour analysis
for multiple source handling, while the presented results refer
to 2D radiation mapping and source localization. Finally,
research activities such as those in [2] aim to address
the problem of 3D mapping and remote access in highly
contaminated sites.
The solutions detailed above require large aerial vehicles
which map macro-sized geographic areas with a low res-
olution understanding of the contamination, or an expan-
sive network of sensors which utilize a large number of
measurements to estimate the covered area’s radiation ﬁeld.
The contribution of this paper refers to a) the integration of
radiation detection and source localization with the GPS–
denied navigation capabilities onboard a small aerial robot,
b) an online 3D source localization and mapping method that
is tailored to the limited amount of measurements that can
be provided by small aerial robots and further exploits the
availability of the real–time reconstructed volumetric map,
as well as c) informative path planning for source seeking
behavior in cluttered and geometrically complex spaces.
III. ONBOARD RADIATION DETECTION
The developed system that enables onboard radiation
detection and source localization is presented in this section.
A. System Overview
The system developed consists of a small hexarotor plat-
form with a take–off weight of 2.6kg. The robot is equipped
with the developed radiation detection system further detailed
below. A Pixhawk–autopilot is employed for the attitude con-
trol, while an Intel NUC5i7RYH and a stereo visual–inertial
sensor are integrated. The visual–inertial sensor provides
synchronized stereo frames (using a StereoLabs ZED) that
are then software synchronized with the IMU data (UM7).
All the planning, localization and mapping, and position
control loops are running on the NUC5i7RYH and with the
support of the Robot Operating System (ROS). The system
performs visual–inertial odometry using ROVIO [22] and
mapping through the point cloud from the stereo camera
and the robot pose estimates. The environment is represented
using an occupancy map M [23] with voxels m of edge
length r. For position control, the linear model predictive
controller described in [24] is utilized.
The choice of radiation detector for this research was
driven by three main considerations, namely a) sensitivity, b)
weight and power consumption, as well as c) spectroscopic
resolution. Scintillation detectors for gamma radiation offer
high sensitivity. Selecting and integrating a new generation
scintillator and photosensor, we demonstrate a highly efﬁ-
cient detector package for miniaturized robots that weighs
41g including the counting and spectroscopy electronics.
For this work, a Thallium-doped Cesium Iodide (CsI(Tl))
scintillator was used and it offers spectroscopy–grade energy
resolution and timing. The complete detector system consists
of a) a Scionix V10B10 CsI(Tl) scintillation crystal, a
small SiPm, and a preampliﬁer integrated in a 18g, cylin-
drical package (66mm long, 16mm wide), as well as b)
a custom–designed pulse counting and spectroscopy circuit
which weighs 23g. The scintillator has a voltage output
in which pulses correspond to gamma photons interacting
with the scintillation crystal. These pulses have amplitudes
proportional to the energy of the gamma photon unique
to each radionuclide. Therefore for spectroscopy, not only
must the counting circuit count the number of pulses present
on the scintillators output, it must also log the amplitude
of the pulses. The pulse counting circuit is a series of 32
comparators which compare reference voltages generated by
a resistor ladder against the output signal from the scintillator
pre-ampliﬁer. The outputs of the comparators are read by
a 32-bit, 180 MHz ARM microcontroller and the system
can discern between 32 different pulse amplitudes, therefore
enabling spectroscopy and separate counting of gamma ra-
diation at different energy levels. Updated measurements are
reported by the microcontroller at 10Hz.
B. Radiation Counts
A radiation detector is used to detect, track, and iden-
tify high–energy particles from radioactive materials. In the
6538
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:09:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
case of this work, gamma–detection is considered and the
observed radiation counts received by the detector can be
modeled as a mixture of the signal from the radioactive
source and the natural background radiation [25, 26].
The radiation counts received due to a radioactive source
s by a symmetric detector at a position pk follows a
homogenous Poisson process [25, 27] with mean intensity
rate per time unit being equal to:
E(ypk
s )
=
Aevs
4π||pk −ps||2
(1)
where A and e are the area and the efﬁciency of the detector,
vs is the source intensity, and ||pk −ps||2 denotes the eu-
clidean distance from the detector to the source. Considering
that the dwell time of detection period is T k
D, then the
expected total number of counts E(Y pk
s
) at the detector due
to the source will be:
E(Y pk
s
)
=
T k
D
Aevs
4π||pk −ps||2
(2)
while the detector also receives radiation from the natural
background (also a Poisson distribution) that takes the form:
E(Y pk
b
)
=
T k
DAevb
(3)
where vb is the background intensity. Since signals due to the
source and background are independent, the total radiation
counts remains a Poisson distribution and the expected value
for the T k
D period takes the form:
E(Y pk) = E(Y pk
s
+ Y pk
b
) = T k
DAe(
vs
4π||pk −ps||2 + vb)
(4)
The quantities A and e of Eq (4) are determined by the
calibration of the detector in a pre–characterized chamber.
The intensity vs is completely determined by the radioactive
source and is therefore unknown. The background intensity
rate vb can be derived through preliminary measurements
away from the expected radiation source (exploiting the fast
decay of the inverse square law). Due to the fact that the
measurement process is governed by a Poisson distribution,
the role of dwell time is critical to ensure reliable measure-
ments through averaging of the counting statistics. For every
dwell position pk, the reading ypk
s
is averaged over T k
D,
background is subtracted and the average value λk is used
for source localization purposes.
C. Detector Calibration
The Scionix V10B10 has a voltage output consisting of
pulses with a width of 2.2μs and an amplitude proportional
to the energy of the gamma photon that triggered the
pulse. This is the basic principle of gamma spectroscopy
- different radioactive sources produce different amplitude
spectra dependent on their energy. The frequency of the
pulses, reported in Counts Per Second (CPS), is proportional
to the level of gamma photons, or the intensity of the ﬁeld.
Therefore, calibration of such a scintillator occurs in two
steps, a dosimetric calibration, and an energy calibration.
Fig. 2. Upper plot: Results of the ﬁrst step of the count calibration in which
the scintillator’s dose rate response (¯λ), measured in counts per second
(CPS), at distances 19cm to 31cm from the source was evaluated. The
scintillator is placed in a calibration chamber with the head of the scintillator
directly facing the source. The data gathered, presented in a lin-log plot,
shows that the count rate complies with inverse square law. Lower plot:
Results of the second step of count calibration in which the scintillator’s
dose rate response (¯λ) over various orientations (δ) was evaluated. Data
is collected at various orientations to the source and reveals a symmetric
response for all angles apart from a narrow cone of reduced sensitivity when
the scintillator faces directly away from the source.
The purpose of dosimetric calibration is to determine the
scintillator’s efﬁciency. For accurate source localization and
more importantly ﬁeld intensity estimation, it is necessary
to determine the relationship between a scintillator’s count
rate, and the true dose rate of the ﬁeld. To determine this
relationship, the scintillator is placed in a calibration chamber
which contains a radioactive source and pre-characterized
dose rate characteristics at various positions.
There are two sub-steps in a dosimetric calibration. The
ﬁrst is to determine the count rate with the scintillator at an
ideal orientation directly facing the source. The scintillator is
placed at various distances from the source, and count rates
are recorded over long dwell times. The second step relates to
determining the directionality of the scintillator in response
to its shape and the position of the integrated electronics.
The scintillator is placed at a single distance from the source
and is rotated around its yaw axis. Variation around its roll
angle is not required due to the symmetrical nature of the
scintillation crystal.
The results of this calibration procedure on our scintillator
are shown in Figure 2. As shown, the scintillator has a
dose rate response in agreement with the inverse square
law of radiation propagation, and from this calibration we
can extract the expression which transforms counts from the
scintillator into the true dose rate of the ﬁeld. The results
also reveal a mostly symmetric orientation response with
roughly 50% decrease in detected counts over a small arc
of orientations when its back faces the source (due to the
interfacing electronics inducing a shielding effect). The latter
results in a cone of reduced sensitivity to sources located
directly behind the sensor.
The second step of a scintillator calibration determines the
energy response of the scintillator when exposed to different
radioactive sources. While sources of a particular energy will
produce pulses of varying amplitude due to back-scattering
6539
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:09:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
and other effects, there will be a dominant amplitude in
a subset of the channels. This dominant subset will be
characteristic for a particular energy level. Figure 2 shows
results of this calibration for Cobalt-60, and Cesium-137.
0
10
20
30
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Co-60
0
10
20
30
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Cs-137
Fig. 3.
Plot showing the results of the energy calibration in which the
scintillator’s energy response to different gamma sources was evaluated.
Speciﬁcally, the cases for Cobalt-60 and Cesium-137 are shown and the
different peak energy channels are presented.
D. Sources of Error and Noise
For a certain detector, a number of reasons for ﬂuctuation
in the response exist. Those include a) possible drift of
the operating characteristics, b) sources of random noise
within the interfacing electronics, c) dead times due to
the time required to separate two interaction events, and
d) statistical noise arising from the discrete nature of the
measured signal (which follows a Poisson distribution) [25].
The latter typically is the most signiﬁcant and represents
an irreducible minimum amount of ﬂuctuation that will
necessarily be present in the detector signal despite the
quality of the scintillator and interfacing circuitry. This arises
from the fact that the charge generated within the detector
by a quantum of radiation is not a continuous variable but
rather represents a discrete number of charge carriers. A
Poisson distribution models the effect and for a mean value
λk, the variance is λk and the standard deviation is √λk.
For multiple measurements acquired at a certain point, the
Poisson distribution can be approximated by a Gaussian one.
E. Automated Dwell Time Calculation
As the variance of the measurement follows its mean,
more measurements must be acquired at higher count rates
to ensure a reliable estimate. Therefore, for robot locations
at higher radiation levels, longer dwell times are required. To
automatically adjust the dwell time T k
D, the system calculates
the derivative of the mean of the signal ypk and considers T k
D
to be sufﬁcient once ˙ypk < yp
thres over a duration tthres
D
> tmin
D .
This allows the robot to optimally use its limited endurance,
dwelling for a short period of time at areas of decreased
radiation intensity (and therefore small variance) and longer
times in the presence of stronger ﬁelds.
IV. SOURCE LOCALIZATION AND ACTIVE
SOURCE SEARCH
Provided the ability of the robot to acquire radiation de-
tection measurements, counting and spectroscopic, alongside
its capability to operate in a GPS–denied manner and map
its environment, a strategy for radioactive source localization
as well as active source search was developed. The proposed
strategy is motivated and accounts for the limited endurance
of the vehicle which entails a very small amount of dwell
points and the fact that GPS–denied localization implies
varying uncertainty of the robot’s own position estimate.
A. Radiation Source Localization
A source localization method designed around key limita-
tions of aerial robots operating in GPS–denied environments
is proposed. It is speciﬁcally motivated from the fact that a)
limited ﬂight endurance implies a constrained set of dwell
points Pk
d especially because long dwell times are required
for reliable measurements, as well as b) the localization
uncertainty of the robot, alongside c) the inherent variance of
radiation detection which increases with the intensity of the
measurement as described by the Poisson distribution statis-
tics. Given that for increased intensity values, longer dwell
times are needed, which further challenges the endurance of
the robot, the ability of the method to operate with a very
limited set of measurements is crucial.
The source localization algorithm begins when the robot
ﬁrst acquires three radiation readings that are above back-
ground at different dwell point locations. The averaged
radiation reading λk (background effect removed) is used. A
main challenge of source localization methods is to appro-
priately use multiple measurements to disambiguate between
possible source locations. Given a single intensity reading,
distinguishing between the cases of a weak source close to
the robot, or a stronger source far away is not possible. The
key insight of the method is that provided at least three
measurements at different locations with variation among all
axes, there will be a single point that satisﬁes the inverse
square law for all three measurements in an environment
with a single radioactive source and no shielding materials.
Expressed geometrically, there will be a single point of
intersection between three spheres corresponding to the same
intensity but each of them centering at a different measure-
ment point. Below, the algorithmic steps leading to source
localization are detailed and summarized in Algorithm 1.
In this framework, the ﬁrst step of the proposed approach
is to spawn sets {Sk} of N concentric spheres for each of
the dwell points pk ∈Pk
d . Each sphere in each of these
sets corresponds to a certain intensity and radius from its
associated dwell point. Subsequently, the algorithm identiﬁes
the set of all possible points I that lie on the circles deﬁning
the intersections between spheres which center on different
dwell locations but have matching intensities. Discretization
of the spheres’ radii and the circles of intersections is used
for efﬁcient calculation.
Given the locations of the intersection points pj
I ∈I and
considering each of them as a possible source location, the
method then estimates the expected radiation reading at all
dwell points from each point of intersection. For all dwell
points, using the normal distribution of radiation readings
centered around the dwell point’s average value
¯λk and
associated standard deviation σλk, the value ρp→pk of the
probability density function (PDF) of the expected reading
˜λpj
I→pk is calculated against all intersections (each of which
6540
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:09:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
Algorithm 1 Source Localization Algorithm - Iteration
1: for all pk ∈Pk
d do
2:
spawn spheres S(pk)
3: end for
4: for all combinations of pk do
5:
ﬁnd the set I of intersection points pj
6: end for
7: for all combinations of pj ∈I and pk ∈Pk
d do
8:
calculate expected reading ˜λpj→pk
9:
derive normal distribution N( ¯λk, σλk)
10:
derive ρpj→pk ←PDF(N( ¯λk, σλk), ˜λpj→pk)
11: end for
12: for all pj ∈I do
13:
derive average probability ¯ρj
14: end for
15: I′ ←{pj ∈I : ¯ρj ≥α max({¯ρj})}
16: derive centroid c of pj ∈I′ and associated σc
17: derive Iopt by removing outliers from I′
18: derive centroid ps of pj ∈Iopt, σs and intensity ¯λs
19: test new source estimate [ps, σs, ¯λs]
20: (identify centroid ps
m of closest voxel m in map M)
21: (ps ←ps
m)
22: Return [ps, σs, ¯λs]
are considered as a possible source location). A cumulative
set Λj
I of such probabilities {ρp→pk} for all intersection
points is derived and the average value ¯ρj is calculated. Then,
the set of averaged probabilities ΛI is formulated.
Provided this set, the method sorts the probabilities
¯ρj and chooses the top subset given a tunable factor a
deﬁning the proportion of values in this subset. Then the
probabilistically–weighted centroid of locations of these in-
tersection points is derived along with its standard deviation.
Searching within the selected subset of the intersecting
points, the algorithm checks if its location lies within the
bounds of one standard deviation and only then it considers
it as part of a new set B of possible ﬁnal estimation results
for the source location and intensity (otherwise considered as
an outlier). Subsequently, the centroid ps of locations of the
points in B is found alongside the average intensity ˜λs. This
tuple [ps, σs, ¯λs] corresponds to the new estimate regarding
the source location and its expected intensity.
Before it is returned as the new best estimate, the tuple
[ps, σs, ¯λs] is tested in terms of reducing the following error
metric:
ϵ
=
1
k
k

i=1
||λk −ˆλps→pk||2
(5)
where ˆλps→pk denotes the expected radiation reading at
pk given the source estimate [ps, σs, ¯λs]. As long as this
error metric is improved between subsequent iterations, the
new source estimate becomes the output of the method.
Furthermore, if signiﬁcant increase in this metric is detected
and by performing ray casting on the map (when available for
the relevant subset of the environment) it is found that there
is an object occluding the latest dwell point with the previous
source location, that dwell point is considered uninformative
or inﬂuenced by external factors (e.g. radiation shielding
materials) and is therefore dropped.
Finally, if the area around the source estimate ps has
been explored, the robot ﬁnds the closest occupied voxel
m in the occupancy map M. Its centroid ps
m updates the
source location estimate, a procedure that exploits the fact
that sufﬁciently accurate maps are derived online and only
solid radiation sources are considered. The whole procedure
is then iteratively repeated at the next dwell point.
B. Radioactive Source Search
For the robot to be able to efﬁciently detect and estimate
the radioactive source location and intensity, informative
measurements are required. In this work, we evaluated both
ﬁxed–lattice patterns when the environment is considered to
be known, and propose a new active radioactive source search
path planner for the cases of initially unknown environments.
This section focuses on the latter part, while the experimental
results also present studies with ﬁxed–lattice trajectories.
1) Environment Representation and Mapping: The envi-
ronment is volumetrically represented in an occupancy map
M that consists of cubical voxels m ∈M with edge length
r. Each voxel is considered as either “unexplored”, “free”
or “occupied”. Update of the map relies on the onboard
localization of the system that exploits visual–inertial cues
and depth data coming from a stereo camera. The robust
odometry framework in [22] is employed to estimate the
robot pose pk. This volumetric map representation is used
for autonomous robot planning.
2) Initial Area Exploration: When the robot is requested
to identify and estimate the source location and intensity in
unknown environments, a set of initial steps take place that
allow it to explore the space until radiation measurements
above background are detected. For this particular step, we
employ our previous work related to next–best–view path
planning [28] with the only difference being that the robot
dwells at each planned exploration viewpoint for time T k
D
adaptively calculated according to Section III-E. This step is
disengaged once three radiation readings λk at respective
dwell points above background are detected and enable
a ﬁrst estimate of the source location. At this point, the
source localization algorithm has returned its ﬁrst estimate
[ps, σs, ¯λs] regarding the radioactive source location and
strength.
3) Active Source Search: Provided the current source esti-
mate [ps, σs, ¯λs] and occupancy map M, a path planning ap-
proach is proposed and aims to derive informative next dwell
points and collision free paths for the robot to efﬁciently
inform the subsequent iteration of the source localization
method. The proposed planner accounts for certain facts and
limitations, namely: a) the fact that only a limited set of
measurements can possibly be acquired due to the endurance
constraints of the robot, b) the importance of sufﬁcient dwell
time to ensure that reliable radiation readings are derived
6541
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:09:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
without compromising the battery life of the robot, as well
as c) the localization uncertainty of the robot as represented
by the covariance matrix of its position Σp. Furthermore, it
aims to ensure progress in the exploration mission which then
ensures that new collision free trajectories can be identiﬁed
and the map within which the source lies is -to a large extent-
explored. Planning takes place in the conﬁguration space of
positions and heading of the robot, that is ξ = [x, y, z, ψ]
assuming small roll and pitch angles.
Given the latest map M, the planner starts from the
current robot conﬁguration ξ0 and incrementally builds a
geometric random tree T with maximum edge length ℓ.
The resulting tree consists of NT nodes ni, associated robot
conﬁgurations ξi and a set of collision free paths μ. A
minimum of Nmin and maximum of Nmax nodes are deﬁned
to ensure sufﬁcient exploration of the conﬁguration space and
low computational times. During the tree spanning process,
yaw rate constraints
˙ψmax are respected given a constant
linear velocity vt. The proposed information gain of a node
ni is denoted as Gain(ni) and takes the form:
Gain(ni)
=
r2
i→s
δ2 e−
r2
i→s
δ2
2
Nk
d

j=0,j̸=j
e
−
ζ2
r2
i→j
2Nk
d
(6)
where ri→j = ||ξi −ξj||2 the distance between the sampled
conﬁgurations xi, xj at nodes ni, nj, ri→s = ||ξi −ξs|| the
distance of the sampled conﬁguration ξi to the source, ξs
is the conﬁguration corresponding to the estimated source
location ps, N k
d is the current number of dwell points, and
δ, ζ are tunable factors that control the maximum of the
function. The node nopt that maximizes this gain is selected
and the associated collision free path μopt
0
leading to ξopt
is extracted. This path is sampled at ν points and a set
of q yaw angle orientations are randomly sampled at each
new vertex. Subject to the maximum yaw rate ˙ψmax, the
method then identiﬁes the sequence of yaw angle orientations
that simultaneously maximize the unexplored volume to be
covered based on the exploration gain described in our
previous work in [28]. The robot is then commanded to
follow this path, dwell at ξopt and perform a new step
of source localization, while the whole process is repeated
iteratively. Through the proposed gain, dwell points that a)
approach the expected source location while avoiding points
very near the source estimate as the robot has localization
uncertainty and very high radiation readings require longer
dwell times, and b) keep distance from all the previous dwell
points are identiﬁed. Figure 4 depicts an illustrative example.
In addition, to ensure further robustness against increased
localization uncertainty of the robot and its correlation with
a possibly wrong estimate of the distance from the source,
which has signiﬁcant inﬂuence due to the inverse square law
of radiation propagation, nodes sampled closer than 1 semi–
major axis of the ellipsoid corresponding to the position
covariance Σp are considered invalid. Similarly, any nodes
corresponding to a robot conﬁguration that would lead to
a measurement λk < λmin, λmin →0 given the current
Fig. 4.
Illustrative example of the next–best–dwell–point location selection
using the proposed gain formulation. In this example, a 3 × 3m grid with
equally–spaced dwell candidates (blue ’×’ marker) are evaluated given the
current source location (red ’◦’ marker) and three previous dwell points
(black ’□’ marker) is considered, while δ = 1 and ζ = 1.85. The next–
best–dwell–point is indicated (green ’▽’ marker), while a surface plot of
the gain over all possible locations is simultaneously presented. As shown,
the method accounts for the previous locations of the dwell points and
the estimate of the source therefore selecting a next dwell location that
provides information from a signiﬁcantly different part of the map and a
varied distance from the source.
source estimate are also eliminated. Overall, this imposes a
geometric constraint ensuring that the next dwell point will
not a) be too far from the expected source location risking
the possibility of getting a measurement close to background,
and b) will not be very close to the source making its inherent
localization uncertainty a reason for erroneous estimation.
V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
Three experiments were conducted to evaluate the per-
formance of the system, the source localization algorithm,
as well as the active source search path planner. Each
experiment was performed in an indoor environment using a
Cs-137 source measuring roughly 618.1μR/h at a distance of
0.65m. The source is a non-destructive testing device com-
monly used in civil engineering and projects a hemispherical
radiation ﬁeld facing upward when the source is exposed.
The ﬁrst experiment consists of the robot ﬂying in a
predetermined ﬁxed-lattice pattern in which the environment
is assumed to be known. The ﬁxed-lattice pattern is a series
of nine measurement locations (dwell points), the ﬁrst of
which is a point just above background and the remaining
eight points are in a grid surrounding the true source location.
The second experiment consists of a similar ﬁxed-lattice
pattern with ten measurements, but also includes a L-shaped
wall of cinder blocks partially surrounding the radiation
source which serves to attenuate the radiation ﬁeld by about
50% at measurement points on the opposite side of the wall
from the source. Finally, the third experiment demonstrates
the active source search path planner, and consists of ﬁve
measurement points whose positions were determined au-
tonomously online. It is noted that due to the requirement to
dwell for several seconds (from 5s to 15s in these results),
the robot is limited to derive the needed source estimate with
typically less than 12 dwell points. The proposed localization
and active search strategy was demonstrated to derive an
accurate source estimate within the ﬁrst four autonomously
selected dwell points.
6542
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:09:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.7]
In each of the visualizations below, the robot’s perception
of the environment is expressed as an octomap [23]. Figure 5
visualizes the results of the ﬁrst experiment in which the
source was localized after the third measurement, at which
point the error ed in distance between the source estimate
and the true source location was ed = 1.52m. After the ﬁnal
measurement, this error in distance was reduced to ed =
0.32m.
Fig. 5.
Fixed–lattice source localization experiment without attenuating
cinder blocks surrounding the source. The robot’s trajectory is presented
as a red line gathered from the robot’s odometry data. Dwell points are
represented as light green semi-transparent spheres with an adjoining solid
green sphere representing the position of the sensor. The true source location
is represented by a green arrow and is unknown to the source localization
algorithm. Finally, the source location estimate is drawn as a solid red
sphere, while the nearest voxel, and true source estimate is denoted by
the yellow arrow positioned above a yellow cube.
Fig. 6.
Fixed–lattice source localization experiment with attenuating cinder
blocks partially surrounding the source. Measurement points #6, #7, and #8
(where measurement point #1 is the point on the lower right side of the
image) are shielded from the radiation source by the cinder block wall, and
their readings are 50% lower than those expected given their position and
the source’s intensity. In this experiment, the ﬁnal source localization error
is 0.28m.
Figure 6 demonstrates that the localization algorithm per-
forms sufﬁciently in the presence of partially attenuated read-
ings given that a ﬁrst set of non–attenuated measurements
were acquired. Operation subject to partially attenuated
measurements is achieved due to the additional step of the
localization method that checks and veriﬁes if a new source
estimate is in agreement with all the dwell points pk and
associated radiation readings λk and drops a measurement if
a signiﬁcant disagreement is identiﬁed.
Fig. 7.
Autonomous active source search experiment. The experiment is
initiated through exploration paths using the exploration planner in [28].
Once three dwell points with radiation readings above background are
identiﬁed, the method commands the robot to dwell, a ﬁrst radioactive source
estimate becomes available and subsequently the active source search for
next–best–dwell–points is engaged. With only 5 dwell points, the method
achieves an error of only ed = 0.31m in the position of the source.
Figure 7 shows the active source search algorithm in its
entirety. At the ﬁnal measurement, the localization error
is 0.31m a result achieved with only 5 dwell points and
associated radiation readings. Finally, Figure 8 presents a
radiation map for the same experiment, using the source
localization estimate (position and source strength) and the
inverse square law to indicate the expected radiation level
at different parts of the map. Overall, the aforementioned
set of results illustrates the ability of the proposed system
to conduct radioactive source localization in GPS–denied
environments, as well as active source search in initially
unknown and unmapped environments through a combina-
tion of ﬁrst steps for exploration, subsequent identiﬁcation
of optimized dwell points and identiﬁcation of intermediate
yaw orientations that support the exploration process during
the source seeking behavior. The complete set of recorded
data are released as an open dataset to enable community
re–utilization [29].
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presented a system and method for localizing a
radiation source in known and unknown environments using
a small aerial robotic platform. The described method is
able to localize a radiation source given a small number of
measurements due to the limited ﬂight endurance of the plat-
form, and accounts for the robot’s own position uncertainty in
ﬂight. Furthermore the algorithm achieves source localization
in the presence of attenuated and inaccurate readings. The
above described planner is able to identify optimal dwell
points for measurement and greatly improves the abilities of
6543
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:09:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.8]
Fig. 8.
Radiation mapping applied on the volumetric map based on the
source localization estimate (location and source strength) and the inverse
square law. This map is derived based on the source estimates and online
maps derived during the autonomous active source search experiment and
presents the potential of 3D/Radiation mapping using small aerial robots. It
is noted that due to the fast decrease of radiation strength values as a result
of the inverse square law, log–scale has been applied on the relevant values
for better colormap representation.
the robot given the platform’s endurance constraints. Finally,
the robot exploits the real-time generated occupancy map
to constrain the search space and achieve higher accuracy
source localization.
Future work will include utilization of the spectroscopy
abilities of the scintillator circuit to perform multi-source
localization. Additionally, semantic classiﬁcation can be uti-
lized to further constrain the search space and improve the
localization of the source using objects visible in the scene.
Finally, methods to improve not only the position, but the in-
tensity estimate of the source should be explored, especially
in cases where measurements are partially attenuated.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Christie, A. Shoemaker, K. Kochersberger, P. Tokekar, L. McLean,
and A. Leonessa, “Radiation search operations using scene understand-
ing with autonomous uav and ugv,” Journal of Field Robotics, 2016.
[2] M. Maimone, L. Matthies, J. Osborn, E. Rollins, J. Teza, and
S. Thayer, “A photo-realistic 3-d mapping system for extreme nuclear
environments: Chernobyl,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems, 1998.
Proceedings., 1998 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, vol. 3.
IEEE, 1998, pp. 1521–1527.
[3] R. Guzman, R. Navarro, J. Ferre, and M. Moreno, “Rescuer: Devel-
opment of a modular chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
robot for intervention, sampling, and situation awareness,” Journal of
Field Robotics, vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 931–945, 2016.
[4] J. Towler, B. Krawiec, and K. Kochersberger, “Radiation mapping in
post-disaster environments using an autonomous helicopter,” Remote
Sensing, vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 1995–2015, 2012.
[5] A. Mazumdar, M. Lozano, A. Fittery, and H. H. Asada, “A compact,
maneuverable, underwater robot for direct inspection of nuclear power
piping systems,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2012 IEEE
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 2818–2823.
[6] K. D. Jarman, E. A. Miller, R. S. Wittman, and C. J. Gesh, “Bayesian
radiation source localization,” Nuclear technology, vol. 175, no. 1,
2011.
[7] H. Wan, T. Zhang, and Y. Zhu, “Detection and localization of
hidden radioactive sources with spatial statistical method,” Annals of
Operations Research, vol. 192, no. 1, pp. 87–104, 2012.
[9] H. E. Baidoo-Williams, R. Mudumbai, E. Bai, and S. Dasgupta,
“Some theoretical limits on nuclear source localization and tracking,”
in Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA). IEEE, 2015.
[8] H. E. Baidoo-Williams, “Maximum likelihood localization of ra-
diation sources with unknown source intensity,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1608.00427, 2016.
[10] G. Cordone, R. R. Brooks, S. Sen, N. S. Rao, C. Q. Wu, M. L. Berry,
and K. M. Grieme, “Improved multi-resolution method for mle-based
localization of radiation sources,” in Information Fusion (Fusion),
2017 20th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–8.
[11] S. Martinez, J. Cortes, and F. Bullo, “Motion coordination with
distributed information,” IEEE Control Systems, 2007.
[12] J. Cortes, S. Martinez, and F. Bullo, “Spatially-distributed coverage
optimization and control with limited-range interactions,” ESAIM:
Control, Optimisation and Calculus of Variations, vol. 11, no. 4, pp.
691–719, 2005.
[13] C. Zhang, D. Arnold, N. Ghods, A. Siranosian, and M. Krstic, “Source
seeking with non-holonomic unicycle without position measurement
and with tuning of forward velocity,” Systems & control letters, 2007.
[14] S. Pang and J. A. Farrell, “Chemical plume source localization,” IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics),
vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 1068–1080, 2006.
[15] C. G. Mayhew, R. G. Sanfelice, and A. R. Teel, “Robust source-
seeking hybrid controllers for autonomous vehicles,” in American
Control Conference, 2007. ACC’07.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1185–1190.
[16] A. Kumar, H. G. Tanner, A. V. Klimenko, K. Borozdin, and
W. C. Priedhorsky, “Automated sequential search for weak radiation
sources,” in Control and Automation, 2006. MED’06. 14th Mediter-
ranean Conference on.
IEEE, 2006, pp. 1–6.
[17] R. Cortez, X. Papageorgiou, H. Tanner, A. Klimenko, K. Borozdin, and
W. Priedhorsk, “Experimental implementation of robotic sequential
nuclear search,” in Control & Automation, 2007. MED’07. Mediter-
ranean Conference on.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1–6.
[18] R. A. Cortez, H. G. Tanner, and R. Lumia, “Distributed robotic
radiation mapping,” in Experimental Robotics.
Springer, 2009.
[19] A. A. R. Newaz, S. Jeong, H. Lee, H. Ryu, N. Y. Chong, and
M. T. Mason, “Fast radiation mapping and multiple source localization
using topographic contour map and incremental density estimation,” in
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2016 IEEE International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1515–1521.
[20] K. Vetter, D. Chivers, and B. Quiter, “Advanced concepts in multi-
dimensional radiation detection and imaging,” in Nuclear Threats and
Security Challenges.
Springer, 2015, pp. 179–192.
[21] A. A. R. Newaz, S. Jeong, H. Lee, H. Ryu, and N. Y. Chong, “Uav-
based multiple source localization and contour mapping of radiation
ﬁelds,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 85, pp. 12–25, 2016.
[22] M. Bloesch, S. Omari, M. Hutter, and R. Siegwart, “Robust visual
inertial odometry using a direct ekf-based approach,” in Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 298–304.
[23] A. Hornung, K. M. Wurm, M. Bennewitz, C. Stachniss, and W. Bur-
gard, “OctoMap: An efﬁcient probabilistic 3D mapping framework
based on octrees,” Autonomous Robots, 2013.
[24] M. Kamel, T. Stastny, K. Alexis, and R. Siegwart, “Model predictive
control for trajectory tracking of unmanned aerial vehicles using ros,”
Springer Book on Robot Operating System (ROS).
[25] G. F. Knoll, Radiation detection and measurement.
John Wiley &
Sons, 2010.
[26] G. J. Feldman and R. D. Cousins, “Uniﬁed approach to the classical
statistical analysis of small signals,” Physical Review D, 1998.
[27] S. Fetter, T. B. Cochran, L. Grodzins, H. L. Lynch, and M. S. Zucker,
“Gamma-ray measurements of a soviet cruise-missile warhead,” Sci-
ence, vol. 248, no. 4957, pp. 828–834, 1990.
[28] A. Bircher, M. Kamel, K. Alexis, H. Oleynikova and R. Siegwart,
“Receding horizon ”next-best-view” planner for 3d exploration,” in
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
May 2016. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ethz-asl/nbvplanner
[29] F. Mascarich, T. Wilson, C. Papachristos, and K. Alexis, “GPS-
denied Radiation Source Localization Dataset.” [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/unr-arl/radiation-source-localization-dataset
6544
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:09:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
