warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0010.pdf
sha256: CD47DDE8A3E07AB98B0B8941C37498A368150A83092EC2F9E12FB6C1A03982C6
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 6
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Autonomous long-range navigation in GNSS-denied 
environment with low-cost UAV platform
André Rossi Kuroswiski 
Department of Electronic Engineering 
Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica (ITA) 
São José dos Campos-SP, Brazil 
kuroswiskiark@fab.mil.br 
Neusa Maria Franco de Oliveira 
Department of Electronic Engineering 
Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica(ITA) 
São José dos Campos-SP, Brazil 
neusa@ita.br 
Élcio Hideiti Shiguemori 
Geo-Intelligence Division 
Institute of Advanced Studies 
São José dos Campos-SP, Brazil 
elcio@ieav.cta.br 
 
Abstract— The capability of an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle to 
navigate in GNSS-denied environments is desired in many 
situations, especially in situation in which the GNSS signal is not 
trustable. In this work is presented a solution based on a low-cost 
UAV platform, that uses a Landmark Recognition algorithm to 
compensate the inertial sensors errors cumulation, aiming to 
perform a long-range navigation, independently of GNSS 
information. The results in a real-time simulation demonstrated 
the effectiveness of the integration between the UAV control and 
the computer vision, performing a successful navigation of 20.7 
km long at 400 meters high, where the system has been able to 
estimate the coordinates during the whole route, with an average 
error lower than 6 meters.   
Keywords— Computer Vision; UAV; Autonomous Navigation 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
The utilization of computer vision algorithms in navigation, 
control and guidance modules of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
(UAV) shown to be a promising solution to increase the 
capabilities of these aircrafts, being a common target of many 
studies recently [1]. A recurrent application of these techniques 
is work as a backup to Global Navigation Satellite Systems 
(GNSS), since these systems can be unreliable in some 
situations, sometimes due to atmospheric conditions [2] or 
even due to intentional interference [3]. The dependency of the 
GNSS signal to navigate is common because most inertial 
systems of aircrafts cannot guarantee a trustable positioning 
information during too much time, since the errors accumulate 
continuously, mainly for small and low cost systems[4]. The 
evolution of these solutions is directly related to the current 
advances in UAV platforms, that bring many new possibilities, 
with more powerful and compact components, as flight 
controllers, onboard processors and sensors [5], [6]. A key 
point in these systems is the integration between the computer 
vision and the aircraft flight controllers that affect directly the 
development of the algorithms, depending on the flexibility, 
the cost, the level of integration and the simulations resources.  
 
This work aims to present a low-cost platform with a 
simple integration between computer vision algorithms and the 
UAV flight controllers, allowing real-time simulations to 
evaluate the performance and integration of the solutions.  
Additionally, an algorithm that uses landmark recognition as 
the main resource to perform an autonomous navigation flight, 
independently of GNSS, is proposed and tested, showing 
successful results in a long range simulated flight, confirming 
the effectiveness of the integration and of the developed 
algorithm.  
II. INTEGRATED PLATFORM 
 
 The platform considered for this work is based on low-cost 
solutions, with open hardware and software components, that 
bring the possibility to evaluating different computer vision 
algorithms in real flight or simulations. The solution is based 
on [7], adding the possibility to perform real-time simulations 
with image processing This possibility increases significantly 
the efficiency in the computer vision algorithms’ development. 
 
The solution is based on the flight controller suite  
Ardupilot [8], that has being developed by an online 
community since 2009. The flight controller, besides the 
flexible UAV control system, also includes several resources, 
such as ground stations, optimized communications protocols, 
models’ simulation and integration with many extra sensors. 
Among these resources, the MAVLink protocol [9] is used in 
this work to establish the connections between the flight 
controller and  the image processing system. This protocol 
allows not only receiving information about all subsystems of 
the controller, but it is also an efficient way to control the UAV 
flight. Fig. 1 presents a possible solution using these resources, 
in this case, a Raspberry Pi [10] computer was selected as the 
processing unit aiming low-cost and flexibility. Internally the 
system has been split in two modules, the integration module 
and the image processing module, in such way that it become 
easy to exchange the image processing algorithm, without too 
many changes in the integration of the flight controller.  
 
Fig. 1 Integrated Platform of computer vision and flight controller system 
978-1-5386-3664-0/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:10:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
 
 
 
The first module, the Integration Module, makes the 
bridge between the flight controller and the image processing 
solution, receiving data and sending commands to the 
Ardupilot, while interpreting the high-level information 
extracted from the images. The Image Processing module is 
flexible enough to work with as many solutions as desired and 
shall will be able to receive the images from the camera, 
extract the information of interest, such as estimates of 
coordinates and speed, or detection of a specific reference. This 
module shall also be able to send the high-level information to 
the Integration Module, where the data will be applied to the 
desired resource, resulting in commands to the UAV controller. 
The flight control of the UAV will be responsibility of the 
Ardupilot, which will use the inputs received from the 
Integration Module. The Integration Module will implement 
the Guidance and Navigation algorithms and both of them will 
take advantage of the data extracted from images.  
III. AUTONOMOUS NAVIGATION ALGORITHM 
The main goal of this work was to develop and evaluate a 
system that is capable of performing a totally autonomous 
long-range navigation without GPS information. The concept 
was use the resources available in the Ardupilot system, in 
high level, to control the UAV flight and apply the computer 
vision to compensate the error cumulation of the inertial 
systems. The idea is to fly relying on the flight controller 
solutions, correcting the path through updated information 
extracted from the processed image.     
 
A. Computer Vision Algorithm 
The main task for the computer vision algorithm is to 
eliminate the errors cumulated in the flight path. To do this, a 
Landmark Recognition algorithm has been selected, that is 
able to estimate the current coordinate, matching previously 
loaded references with the current captured image [11]. For 
the utilization of this algorithm, distinct areas or objects in the 
flight region need to be selected from previous geo-referenced 
images. Then, during the flight, when the algorithm identifies 
a match, knowing the coordinate of the pre-loaded image, it 
calculates the estimated position. Certainly, this solution has 
some drawbacks, such as the dependency of previous images 
and the availability of good landmarks. However, only a 
positive identification guarantees the total elimination of the 
cumulated errors, with only the intrinsic errors remaining, that 
can be just a few meters [11]. In this work, the Landmark 
Recognition will be considered as a black box that has the pre-
loaded image and its georeferenced information, receives as 
input the acquired images from an embedded camera in the 
UAV and has as output the indication if a previously loaded 
reference was identified. 
 
B. Navigation Route 
Considering the capabilities of the Landmark Recognition, 
the navigation route was defined based on Control Points (CP) 
and Auxiliary Points (AP). The CPs define the route itself, 
being positions that the aircraft need to overfly and change the 
flight in the direction of the next CP. The APs are positions 
defined by landmarks spread all over the flight region, mainly 
close to the expected flight path, working as references that 
allow the system to update the estimated position between two 
CP. Both kind of points shall be related to distinct areas or 
objects in the terrain, available in previous image of the 
region. They shall work as input for the Landmark 
Recognition algorithm, allowing the UAV fly the path 
between all CPs, using the APs to get the positions updates 
most continuously as possible.  
 
C. Controlling the UAV 
Due the characteristics of the navigation path through 
landmarks, we defined three main methods to interact with the 
flight controller in a such way that, only using these methods, 
the guidance algorithm would be able to perform all the 
planned routes. The methods are: control the flight speed over 
the ground, control the flight direction and perform lateral 
adjusts in the current path. However, without external 
information, as GPS for example, we know that the precision 
of these methods would be considerably unreliable, mainly for 
small and low-cost components, as those ones considered for 
this study [12]. Therefore, the idea of the methods is to be an 
initial reference to command the UAV flight, and then, using 
the computer vision information, update the flight state 
comparing it with the desired route.  
Aiming to be able to create the defined methods to control 
the UAV flight, the first step was the selection of the operation 
mode of the flight controller, those which are called flight 
modes in the Ardupilot, and the determination of how the 
aircraft will respond to external commands [8]. The selected 
mode was the GUIDED_NOGPS, that is an experimental 
mode that accept direct commands of pitch, roll and yaw, 
holding the UAV stable in the selected attitude, changing or 
not the flight altitude, depending on the command. This mode 
relies only on the internal filtered data of inertial systems of 
the flight controller, do not using any external information. 
Using the capabilities of this flight mode, it was proposed 
three relative simple solutions for the desired methods to 
control the UAV: 
 
Control the Flight Speed: the correlation between the pitch 
attitude and the horizontal stabilized speed shall be modeled 
through empirical tests. The tests consisted in perform many 
flights in different pitch attitudes. For each pitch commanded, 
the average aircraft horizontal speed was calculated. At the 
end, for each pitch angle there was an expected aircraft speed. 
These results can work as reference to send specific 
commands of pitch angle to the GUIDED_NOGPS mode, 
depending on the desired horizontal speed. 
 
Control Flight Direction: the reference selected for the 
direction of the displacement was the magnetic heading, and 
then, the new desired direction can be reached sending yaw 
commands to the flight controller.  
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:10:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
Lateral Adjustments: the correlation between roll attitude and 
the lateral stabilized speed is modeled through empirical tests 
as in the horizontal speed determination tests. The results 
allow to send specific commands via the GUIDED_NOGPS 
mode, defining a roll angle during a necessary time to correct 
the estimated lateral error in the path. 
 
Using these solutions, it is possible to have enough control 
of the UAV in high level to perform the desired missions, the 
long-range navigation, taking advantage of the Ardupilot 
resources to simplify the work, allowing to keep the focus on 
the development of the Guidance algorithm that incorporate 
the processed image information. In this project, the 
coordinates’ 
information 
is 
estimated 
through 
the 
identification of a previous selected landmark, received from 
the Landmark Recognition algorithm, as implemented in [11]. 
However, the selection of which landmark to consider for each 
moment of the flight is a different problem. 
 
D. Landmarks adaptive selection 
To perform the proposed long-range navigation, a huge 
number of landmark references can be demanded to ensure a 
continuous update of the estimates. However, in each moment 
of the flight only a small number would be real candidates to 
be identified, since they need to be in the field of view of the 
UAV camera. Therefore, to ensure an optimized performance, 
avoiding unnecessary processing and reducing the risk of false 
positives, an adaptive selection of the landmark candidates was 
proposed aiming to only feed the algorithm with the landmarks 
that can really be in the captured images.  
The first reference is the distances that the image represents 
in the ground (DGround). Since in this project, for the whole 
flight, the camera will be in nadir position, looking down, the 
calculation of DGround can be simplified, only using the flight 
height (h) and the camera field of view (α) by the equation: 
 
                           


2
tan
/ 2
Ground
D
h



                       (1) 
 
Considering this information available it is possible to 
check which of the landmarks  could be in the region of the 
captured image. However, it would be necessary to repeat this 
calculation constantly during the flight. Since the number of 
landmarks to be checked can be huge, it demands a lot of 
processing capacity. The second problem is that, since the 
position is an estimate, the area defined relying on this 
information may not correspond to the real situation, and 
landmarks that are in the image should be considered in the 
algorithm. The solution was to create a process to define which 
of the APs should be considered in each part of the route, 
including an expected maximum error in the estimated 
coordinate to expand the search area.  
This process to identify the candidates for each path of the 
route and the decision about which of them should be 
considered at each position of the UAV during the mission is 
done based on maximum expected error when flying relying 
only on the inertial systems. This expected error depends on  
the characteristic of the model and the onboard sensors [12]. In 
this work, based on the methods applied to control the UAV, 
two references were considered, the maximum expected error 
in the estimated flight direction (HMaxErr) and the maximum 
expected error in the estimated ground speed (GSMaxErr).  
In the first step, the estimated maximum errors are used to 
define the area in which the landmarks will be considered as 
reference for each path. This is done calculating the maximum 
lateral and longitudinal errors in the case that the UAV flies 
with maximum errors rates the whole time between two CPs. 
Then, the distance captured by the camera is added to the 
maximum lateral error, based on (1), resulting in the total 
maximum lateral distance from the path in which a landmark 
can still be considered to coordinate estimate. The maximum 
longitudinal error, in similar way, defines the distance after the 
CP in which landmarks are considered, and then, using these 
two results the total area of landmark candidates is created. 
This is presented in Fig. 2. In the diagram, ϴ is the HMaxErr, Eh 
is the maximum expected lateral error for the flight between 
the CPs, Egs is the maximum expected longitudinal error, the 
green rectangle is the area visualized by the camera and the 
rectangle with dashed red lines is the area of added APs. 
 
This heuristic process restricted the number of APs 
considered for each part of the route, however, depending on 
the distance between two CPs and the number of landmarks, 
the amount of APs can still be big, reducing the performance of 
the Landmark Recognition algorithm. The solution was to 
define a dynamic criterion to create a sorted list of the APs to 
be included in the algorithm search for each path. The criteria 
utilizes the distance of the projection of the AP in the route to 
the next CP, so, knowing the distance from the estimated 
position to the next CP, the difference work as the reference to 
add the AP in the search or not. In the end, a pile with the APs 
of each path is created considering these distances, and then, 
during the flight only the next candidate is evaluated, the 
closest of the current estimated position, and, if the AP is close 
enough to be in the captured image, it is included in the search 
of the Landmark Recognition and removed from the pile.  
 
 
Fig. 2 – Calculation of the landmark candidates’ area 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:10:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
Additionally, the uncertainty about the position is included 
utilizing GSMaxErr to calculate the maximum expected error 
since the last landmark was recognized. This value is added to 
the minimum distance to include the next AP of the pile, which 
expands the search area dynamically depending on the 
accumulation of errors. 
 
These solutions are certainly not the optimal processes; 
however, they are a simple way to reduce significantly the 
demands of the Landmark Recognition algorithm. Furthermore, 
these processes do not reduce the probability of success in the 
identification of new references, since all landmarks really 
present in the captured image will be in the search procedure at 
the correct moment. 
E. Guidance algorithm 
 
After the definition of the methods to control the UAV, and 
techniques to select the landmarks to search during each 
moment of the flight, the Guidance algorithm, basically, shall 
merge the resources to operate in real-time during the flight.  
 
Considering the methods developed to control the UAV 
and the capabilities of the Landmark Recognition, the guidance 
shall operate continuously in the following process:  
 
Considering the last recognized position, fly with 
desired speed, within the necessary timeframe, in the 
required direction to reach the next CP. 
 
If during the path a new AP, identified through the 
landmark, indicates an error related to the desired 
path, do the necessary lateral correction to go back to 
the correct route. 
 
If the recognized landmark is the next CP, change the 
direction to overfly the point. 
 
Once the point is reached and overflown, the next CP 
is updated, and the flight direction is changed again, 
starting the same process in the new path. 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 
 
The first evaluation of the proposed solution to perform a 
long-range flight navigation in a denied-GPS environment was 
done in the developed simulation platform presented in Fig. 3. 
All the subsystem of the real UAV were simulated using the 
Simulation in The Loop (SITL)[13] resource present in the 
Ardupilot system. The model was a quadcopter based in [14] 
already integrated with the SITL.  
A. Planned Mission 
The test consisted in a planned navigation route in the 
nearby areas of the Berlin Tegel Airport, an area that contain a 
great variety in the terrain characteristics and have available 
good quality satellite images. The planed route, at 400 meters 
high, was defined by 10 CP and 71 AP. The CPs indicate 
changes in the flight direction, and the Aps work as reference 
to update the estimated positions during the route paths, 
totalizing 20.7 kilometers of navigation.  
 
 
 
Fig. 3 – Diagram of the simulation platform 
 
B. Navigation Results 
The results were analyzed over a qualitative approach, 
about the mission accomplishment, and quantitatively about 
the errors in the estimated coordinate, comparing the 
calculated positions with the simulated GPS information. 
The planned route is presented in yellow in Fig. 4, 
overlapped by the navigation results, shown in magenta. As it 
is possible to see, the path followed by the UAV is almost all 
the time over the planned route, excepting some parts when 
the absence of distinct landmarks did not guarantee constant 
corrections.   
A closer view of some paths is shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, 
where the white circumferences represents APs available 
during the flight. In Fig. 5 are presented paths with some parts 
without enough APs to have an appropriated continuous 
update of position estimate. In these cases, it is possible to see 
that sometimes the UAV losses the correct flight direction 
until find a new reference. On the other hand,  Fig. 6 shows 
paths where the availability of APs is spread all over the 
course, and then, the UAV was able to correct its position 
continuously, flying almost all the time over the planned route.  
 
 
 
Fig. 4 Planned and performed navigation in Berlin Tegel Airport nearby 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:10:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
 
Fig. 5 Navigation paths in regions with low concentration of APs 
 
 
Fig. 6 Navigation paths in regions with high concentration of APs 
 
The second evaluation, about the precision of the 
coordinates’ estimation, found that, considering all the flight, 
the average error was 5.75 meters, while, considering only the 
estimates based on identified landmarks, the average decreases 
to 3.77 meters. All the errors in the estimated positions during 
the navigation is presented in Fig. 7. As it is possible to see, in 
some parts of the flight the error increased significantly, 
reaching  its maximum  in the path between the CPs 2 and 3, 
presented in Fig. 5. In this part, the error reached 64.4 meters 
due a flight without any update done by landmark information 
for 72 seconds. However, as soon a new AP was identified, 
the error was immediately reduced to less than 5 meters and 
the UAV returned to the correct path. 
 
 
Fig. 7 Errors in the estimated coordinate during the flight 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
The initial results confirmed the effectiveness of the 
proposed solution. It shown that the integration worked as 
expected and the utilization of the Landmark Recognition 
algorithm to perform a long-range navigation independently of 
satellite positioning systems is feasible in regions with enough 
distinct references in the terrain. The methods to control the 
UAV shown to be enough in the evaluated conditions, 
allowing to explore the well-established algorithms of the 
Ardupilot suite in high level, to perform the autonomous long-
range navigation. However, since the current results are 
limited to the simulation and restricted to a specific scenario, 
some drawbacks may not be clear as, for example, the effects 
of weather conditions in the Landmark Recognition and in the 
proposed methods for UAV control. Therefore, the next step 
will be the evaluation of the system in a real flight, using the 
same platform, aiming to compare the results and identify 
possible restrictions for the proposed methods.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
C. Kanellakis and G. Nikolakopoulos, “Survey on Computer Vision 
for UAVs: Current Developments and Trends,” J. Intell. Robot. 
Syst. Theory Appl., vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 141–168, 2017. 
[2] 
K. Wezka, I. Herrera-Pinzon, and R. Galas, “Reliability monitoring 
of GNSS observables under the influence of ionospheric 
disturbances,” Proc. IEEE/ION Position, Locat. Navig. Symp. 
PLANS 2016, pp. 431–441, 2016. 
[3] 
J. A. Larcom and H. Liu, “Modeling and characterization of GPS 
spoofing,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Technologies 
for Homeland Security, HST 2013, 2013, pp. 729–734. 
[4] 
P. F. F. Silva Filho, “Automatic Landmark Recognition in Aerial 
Images for Autonomous Navigation System of Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles,” Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica, 2016. 
[5] 
G. Cai, J. Dias, and L. Seneviratne, “A Survey of Small-Scale 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: Recent Advances and Future 
Development Trends,” Unmanned Syst., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 175–199, 
2014. 
[6] 
Z. Yang, F. Lin, and B. M. Chen, “Survey of autopilot for multi-
rotor unmanned aerial vehicles,” in IECON 2016 - 42nd Annual 
Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 2016, pp. 
6122–6127. 
[7] 
L. Meier, P. Tanskanen, F. Fraundorfer, and M. Pollefeys, “the 
Pixhawk Open-Source Computer Vision Framework for Mavs,” 
ISPRS - Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci., vol. 
XXXVIII-1/, no. September, pp. 13–18, 2012. 
[8] 
Ardupilot Development Team, “ArduPilot Autopilot Suite,” 2016. 
[Online]. Available: http://ardupilot.org/ardupilot/. [Accessed: 12-
Jul-2017]. 
[9] 
L. Meier, “MAVLink Micro Air Vehicle Communication Protocol - 
QGroundControl GCS,” http://qgroundcontrol.org/mavlink/start, 
2009. [Online]. Available: http://qgroundcontrol.org/mavlink/start. 
[Accessed: 30-May-2017]. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:10:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
[10] 
Raspberry Pi Foundation, “Raspberry Pi,” Ultim. Guid. to 
Raspberry Pi, no. 324, pp. 105–119, 2014. 
[11] 
P. S. Filho, E. H. Shiguemori, and O. Saotome, “UAV VISUAL 
AUTOLOCALIZATON BASED on AUTOMATIC LANDMARK 
RECOGNITION,” in ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote 
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, 2017, vol. 4, no. 2W3, 
pp. 89–94. 
[12] 
M. Bryson and S. Sukkarieh, “Uav localization using inertial 
sensors and satellite positioning systems,” in Handbook of 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, 2015, pp. 433–460. 
[13] 
Ardupilot Development Team, “SITL Simulator (Software in the 
Loop),” 2016. [Online]. Available: http://ardupilot.org/dev/docs/sitl-
simulator-software-in-the-loop.html. [Accessed: 18-Oct-2017]. 
[14] 
J. M. Goppert, “An adaptable, low cost test-bed for unmanned 
vehicle systems research,” Pudue University, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:10:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
