warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0003.pdf
sha256: 7340F97BAAC9043710CD68160D0D6932D5E34F1BFC40E7260F72AA29A0E20B71
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 5
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Autonomous Navigation in GPS-Denied
Environments Using Visual SLAM
Lucky Babu Jayswal
Department of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering
Tribhuvan University,
IOE Pulchowk Campus
Lalitpur, Nepal
077bas019.lucky@pcampus.edu.np
Samim Khadka
Department of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering
Tribhuvan University,
IOE Pulchowk Campus
Lalitpur, Nepal
077bas037.samim@pcampus.edu.np
Anil Kumar Shah
Department of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering
Tribhuvan University,
IOE Pulchowk Campus
Lalitpur, Nepal
077bas002.anil@pcampus.edu.np
Bibek Yonzan
Department of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering
Tribhuvan University,
IOE Pulchowk Campus
Lalitpur, Nepal
077bas005.bibek@pcampus.edu.np
Biman Rimal
Department of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering
Tribhuvan University,
IOE Pulchowk Campus
Lalitpur, Nepal
biman.rimal@pcampus.edu.np
Nawraj Bhattarai
Department of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering
Tribhuvan University,
IOE Pulchowk Campus
Lalitpur, Nepal
bnawraj@gmail.com
David Chieng
Department of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering
University of Nottingham
Ningbo China
Ningbo 315100, China
david.chieng@nottingham.edu.cn
Bikash Nakarmi
College of Electronic and
Information Engineering
Nanjing University of Aeronautics
and Astronautics,
Nanjing 211106, China
bikash@nuaa.edu.cn
Abstract—This paper presents the real-time implementation of
a visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) for in-
door quadcopter navigation. The research aims to autonomously
navigate in GPS-denied spaces by localization and mapping in
real time. The proposed system integrates an Intel RealSense
D435 depth camera, a Raspberry Pi 4B for onboard computation,
a laser rangefinder for altitude measurement, and a Pixhawk
4 flight controller. The RTAB-Map SLAM is first tested in a
simulation using ROS and Gazebo to ensure its robustness and
further deployed in real-world experiments. The experiments
carried out successfully demonstrated autonomous indoor UAV
navigation with a quadcopter operating at a maximum speed of
0.5 m/s while maintaining a set altitude of 0.5 m with a mean path
error and mean altitude deviation of 0.094 ± 0.031 m and 0.027 ±
0.005 m respectively, across different indoor environments, while
producing 2D grid maps and 3D point cloud (PCL) maps. This
work demonstrates that indoor autonomous UAV navigation can
be realized using low-cost, off-the-shelf components and open-
source SLAM techniques.
Index Terms—SLAM, Depth camera, Raspberry Pi, GPS-
denied, RTAB-Map, ROS, Gazebo, UAV.
I. INTRODUCTION
The advent of Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) has im-
pacted industries, most notably defense and transportation. For
example, a large numbers of UASs were used in the 2022
Russia-Ukraine war [1]. Amazon, the e-commerce company, is
also known to use drones to deliver packages to its customers
[2]. Among various types of UAS, quadcopters are the most
popular due to their simple design, low cost of manufacturing
and applicability in indoor and outdoor applications. With the
rise of the low-altitude economy, autonomous localization and
navigation have become two critical capabilities for UAVs.
Most autonomous systems these days, such as spacecrafts
and road vehicles, rely on a positional system like Global
Positioning System (GPS) to localize the vehicle in 3D space.
However, the reliance on GPS presents a significant obstacle
to developing truly autonomous UAV capabilities, particularly
in indoor or GPS-denied environments. To solve this problem,
robotics systems include a localization and navigation system
known as SLAM that helps in aiding the robot, where prior
knowledge of the environment is either inaccessible or un-
known. SLAM is used in several applications like search and
rescue (SAR), planetary observations, precision agriculture,
and autonomous navigation in crowded environments [3].
Among the numerous SLAM algorithms developed, Visual
SLAM and LiDAR SLAM are the most prominent approaches
used in UAV applications. Catania et al. [4] used an RGB-D
camera, an ArduPilot flight computer, and LiDAR with the
2026 International Conference on ICT and Photonics (ICTP) | 979-8-3315-7289-1/26/$31.00 ©2026 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICTP67998.2026.11485150
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 16:49:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
Real Time Appearance Based Mapping (RTAB-Map) algo-
rithm in a Robot Operating System (ROS) Noetic setup to map
indoor environments. The study also integrates You Only Look
Once (YOLO) algorithm for object recognition and feature
extraction. The work by Wu et al. [5] addresses the idea of
indoor localization using an RGB-D camera along with an
IMU for a “vision-based UAV”. Also, Chen et al. [6] proposed
RTAB-Map for a real time 3D reconstruction using a vision-
based quadcopter equipped with a Pixhawk flight controller
and a Realsense D435 depth camera. The study also presents
the idea of using multiple sessions of flight as the RTAB-
Map algorithm allows synchronous mapping due to its unique
memory management. However, these works are costly and
have not considered autonomous navigation in a GPS-denied
environment using SLAM.
Therefore, in this paper, we focus on integrating path
planning with SLAM using a low-cost onboard computer
and flight controller, providing a cost-effective solution for
autonomous SAR operations in GPS-denied environments. The
proposed method has great potential in a country like Nepal,
where most of the terrain is outside the reach of the GPS
signals and is prone to disasters.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. SLAM Algorithm
SLAM, a technique of mapping environments by localiz-
ing the sensor position in the environment with centimeter
accuracy is widely researched in different applications of
automation including robotics, UAS and others. There are
several SLAM algorithms developed so far for robotics ap-
plications, like Hector SLAM, Gmapping, Oriented FAST
and Rotated BRIEF SLAM (ORB-SLAM), Large-Scale Di-
rect Monocular SLAM (LSD-SLAM), RTAB-Map, etc. For
the purpose of comparsion of Visual SLAM algorithms, the
experimental results obtained by Merzlyakov et al. [7] for
ground robot in a low featured indoor environment is presented
in Table I. This experiment is done utilizing four pioneer
sequences of the TUM RGB-D dataset [8]. The data is
presented in terms of average RMSE and runtime duration of
one dataset execution. RTAB-Map is most accurate method
among compared algorithm in this environment since it is
499% more accurate than ORB-SLAM3 and 36% compared
to OpenVSLAM. RTAB-Map was selected for this project,
because it shows the best capability to recover from losing
its track throughout the sequences. RTAB-Map [9] is a graph-
based SLAM approach that has been integrated in ROS as
the RTAB-Map ROS package since 2013. Fig. 1 shows its
main ROS node called RTAB-Map. The odometry for RTAB-
Map is an external input, meaning that SLAM can also be
done using any kind of odometry, providing the flexibility
on choosing the odometry based on the application and robot
types. The structure of the map is a graph with nodes and links.
After sensor synchronization, the Short-Term Memory (STM)
module creates a node storing the odometry pose, sensor’s raw
data and additional information useful for next modules in the
memory. Basically, RTAB-Map’s memory is divided into a
Working Memory (WM) and a Long Term Memory (LTM).
TABLE I: VSLAM Comparison with TUM RGB-D Bench-
marking Results
Algorithm
RMSE
Avg. (m)
Dataset
Runtime (mm:ss)
ORB-SLAM3
1.720
03:35
RTAB-Map
0.287
05:20
OpenVSLAM
0.392
03:26
Fig. 1: RTAB-Map Workflow [9]
B. Path Planning Integration
The A* algorithm was implemented in this work, making
it compatible with the ROS ecosystem. In all autonomous
vehicles, the navigation module is divided into a global planner
and a local planner, where the former finds the optimal
path with a priori knowledge of the environment and static
obstacles, and the latter recalculates the path to avoid dynamic
obstacles. A* algorithm [10] acts as a global planner while
Regulated Pure Pursuit (RPP) [11] as a local planner in this
work. A* is one of the best-first search algorithms, as it
is formulated in terms of weighted graphs; starting from a
specific starting node of a graph, aiming to find a path to
the given goal node having the smallest cost (least distance
traveled, shortest time, etc.). RPP provides linear regulation
cost functions that adapt the robot’s translational velocity to
certain environmental conditions like sharp turns or congested
areas. Specifically, A* selects the path that minimizes the cost
function:
f(n) = g(n) + h(n)
where n is the next node on the path, g(n) is the cost of the
path from the start node to n node, and h(n) is a heuristic
function that estimates the cost of the cheapest path from n to
the goal.
C. Simulation Setup
Unified Robot Description Format (URDF) is an XML
file format for specifying the geometry and organization of
robots in the ROS ecosystem. URDF of our quadcopter
was created to test the SLAM algorithms to see how the
algorithm will behave when implemented in the real world.
Gazebo provides a realistic physics-based environment for
the quadcopter to generate real time data from the onboard
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 16:49:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
sensors to input into the SLAM algorithm. Similarly, an
indoor environment with obstacles was created in Gazebo for
testing the SLAM algorithm. In Gazebo, an URDF model
of the quadcopter containing all the components like the
imaging sensor, flight computer, brushless motor, etc. was
simulated. The map was visualized using the RTAB-Map
Graphical User Interface (GUI). For the simulation of the
SLAM algorithm, the PX4 flight stack was selected. The PX4
flight stack provides versatile APIs for the sensors (camera and
range finder) and the companion computer (Raspberry Pi 4B).
Jointly with ROS, Gazebo and the PX4 flight stack, a robust
simulation environment was created. The RTAB-Map SLAM
algorithm then generates vision poses which subsequently are
then used by the path planning algorithm to generate global
and local trajectories between goal points. The entire process
is facilitated by ROS, using ROS nodes and topics. The data
from the topics are then visualized using Robot Visualization
(RViz). A schematic representation of the simulation tools is
shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2: Schematic Representation of the Simulation
D. Hardware Integration
All components like brushless motor, Electronic Speed
Controller (ESC), flight controller, battery and propeller were
assembled with a COTS (Commercial-Off-The-Shelf) quad-
copter frame made of carbon fiber. The quadcopter was
then integrated with an Intel RealSense D435, a VL53L1X
rangefinder, a Pixhawk 4 flight computer, and a Raspberry
Pi 4B onboard computer. The fully assembled quadcopter is
shown in Fig. 3. The actual hardware implementation shares
similarities with the Software in the Loop (SITL) setup. For
flight tests, the processes are divided into three interconnected
boards. The Pixhawk controls the actuators, i.e., the brushless
motors and ESCs while the companion computer handles the
SLAM and path planning computations and connects to the
ground control station via a Wi-Fi access point. The ground
control station (GCS) is an Ubuntu 20.04 computer with ROS
Noetic installed, communicating with the onboard companion
computer via SSH. The architecture for this implementation
is shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 3: Fully Assembled Quadcopter
SSH
Topics
/grid_map
/move_base
Drivers for range ﬁnder 
i.e., VL53L1x
PID Controller
EKF2
FCU
RGB-D Camera drivers i.e.,
Intel RealSense D435
ROS Nodes
UAV
Serial
921600
(master)
Ground Control Station
(remote)
Companion Computer
Fig. 4: Flight Test Architecture
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Simulation in Gazebo
Fig. 5 shows the virtual environment used for initial simu-
lations of mapping and localization capabilities. The 3D PCL
map, the 3D reconstruction of the environment as shown in
Fig. 6 and the trajectories followed by the quadcopter, ob-
tained through SLAM, were visualized using RTAB-Map GUI.
Additionally, the move base ROS framework was utilized in
conjunction with RTAB-Map to navigate autonomously. The
move base node is an implementation of a ROS action, whose
goal is to move the vehicle, the quadcopter in this context, to
a given goal in the world. This framework integrated global
and local path planning algorithms, where the global planner
implemented the A* algorithm and the local planner employed
RPP for efficient obstacle avoidance.
B. Real Time Indoor Testing
The autonomous flight of the quadcopter was tested in an
indoor environment created in a room, with dimensions of 10
m × 8 m with nets installed on the sides for safety. An image
of the environment is shown in Fig. 7a. In this controlled
setting, posters were placed in front of the camera to provide
additional visual cues. The quadcopter demonstrated stable
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 16:49:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
(a) World 1
(b) World 2
Fig. 5: Virtual Indoor Environment in Gazebo
(a) World 1
(b) World 2
Fig. 6: 3D PCL Map of Virtual Environment
hovering at the desired altitude (0.5 m) using fused SLAM data
from depth camera inputs and IMU data from the Pixhawk.
Instead of RGB images, which uses higher processing power,
infrared data from the depth camera was utilized for efficiency.
The infrared camera was used because it has a good global
shutter and has larger field of view, two important things to
get better visual odometry. Similarly, the quadcopter was also
tested at Manufacturing Lab [12] as seen in Fig. 7b and Senior
Classroom.
(a) Simulated Indoor Environment
(b) Manufacturing Lab
Fig. 7: Real World Environments
Flight testing in the indoor environment was done in three
different configurations of the environment to ensure the
robustness of the experiment efficiently. The configurations
were: obstacle free, single obstacle, and two-obstacle envi-
ronments. First, the quadcopter was made to take off up to
0.5 m in all environments and then multiple goal points were
provided inside the environment using RViz GUI to navigate
the quadcopter throughout the whole environment.
A 2D grid map of the environments can be viewed in Fig. 8
and 9 in which the boundary of the environment and free space
is represented by black and white colors, respectively. Simi-
larly, Fig. 10 and 11 show 3D PCL map of the environments
with distinct features like posters, corners, bench, table, and
the walls. The red curve on both maps represent the trajectory
of the quadcopter. The starting points and goal points are
represented by blue dots and black/green stars respectively.
The trajectory plot signifies the quadcopter’s path over time
in a given space, showing how the drone moves from one
point to another. This is crucial for localization accuracy to
see how closely the trajectory follows the expected path. Also,
a smooth trajectory indicates stable and accurate navigation.
Fig. 12 and 13 illustrates the actual trajectory, color-coded by
path error, against the straight trajectory connected by goal
points. The color gradient indicates path error (in meters),
which shows least path error, represented by blue, followed
by an increase in path error, represented with red color.
This visualization signifies deviations along the trajectory,
supporting error analysis and performance evaluation.
(a) Obstacle Free Environment
(b) Two-obstacle Environment
Fig. 8: 2D Grid Map
(a) Manufacturing Lab
(b) Senior Classroom
Fig. 9: 2D Grid Map
(a) Obstacle Free Environment
(b) Two-obstacle Environment
Fig. 10: 3D PCL Map
Table II shows the mean path error and mean altitude
deviation for all five different environments. These results
were obtained by conducting the experiment seven times in
each environment. Path error is highest (0.13 m) for single
obstacle environment because of the loss in odometry data due
to lack of features in environment. Similarly, it is least (0.06
m) for senior classroom which has a lot of features compared
to others.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 16:49:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
(a) Manufacturing Lab
(b) Senior Classroom
Fig. 11: 3D PCL Map
(a) Obstacle Free Environment
(b) Two-obstacle Environment
Fig. 12: Path error measured from goal point to goal point
(a) Manufacturing Lab
(b) Senior Classroom
Fig. 13: Path error measured from goal point to goal point
The mean altitude deviation is in between 4% to 7% for
all cases which is due to the noise associated with laser range
finder sensor. The proposed scheme shows mean path error
and mean altitude deviation of 0.094 ± 0.031 m and 0.027 ±
0.005 m respectively, across indoor environments indicating
consistent and accurate trajectory tracking performance. These
deviations and errors can be further minimized with better
computing unit instead of Raspberry Pi 4B.
TABLE II: Error Quantification Across Environments
Environment
Mean Path
Error (m)
Mean Altitude
Deviation (m)
No Obstacle
0.07
0.024
Single Obstacle
0.13
0.035
Two-obstacle
0.09
0.029
Manufacturing Laboratory
0.12
0.026
Senior Classroom
0.06
0.021
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, the quadcopter achieved successful au-
tonomous navigation using the RTAB-Map algorithm inte-
grated with the A* algorithm for path planning and created a
3D PCL map of the indoor environment in both simulation and
real world tests. The quadcopter successfully navigated while
avoiding obstacles in different scenarios and optimized its
path to the provided goal positions. However, the quadcopter’s
capacity to carry out path planning and obstacle avoidance was
only restricted to 2D due to hardware limitations.
The future scope of this work focuses on improving the
robustness and suitability of the quadcopter for real-world
deployment by increasing both its computational power and
operational range. Key improvements would be upgrading the
onboard processing hardware for handling visual SLAM more
efficiently and incorporating 3D path planning. Performance
can also be optimized by shifting computationally intensive
tasks to a ground station via wireless data transfer allowing
offboard SLAM and path planning.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors express their sincere gratitude to the Research
Center of Low Altitude Economy (RCLAE) for their valuable
support in facilitating the research activities presented in this
paper. We appreciate the resources and environment provided
that were instrumental in the completion of this study.
REFERENCES
[1] S. G. Jones, J. Harrington, C. K. Reld, and M. Strohmeyer, “Combined
arms war- fare and unmanned aircraft systems: A new era of strategic
competition,” tech. rep., Center for Strategic and International Studies
(CSIS), 2022.
[2] T. Apodaca, “An inside look of Amazon’s drones deliveries in San
Joaquin County - CBS Sacramento,” Oct. 2023.
[3] M. F. Ahmed, K. Masood, V. Fremont, and I. Fantoni, “Active SLAM:
A Review on Last Decade,” Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), vol. 23, p.
8097, Sept. 2023.
[4] R. Catania, “Politecnico di Torino Master’s Degree in Mechatronic
Engineering,” 2023.
[5] J.-X. Wu and Y.-P. Hsu, “The Indoor Localization of a Vision-Based
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle,” International Journal of iRobotics, vol. 4,
pp. 1–6, Apr. 2021.
[6] X. Chen, X. Zhu, and C. Liu, “Real-Time 3D Reconstruction of
UAV Acquisition System for the Urban Pipe Based on RTAB-Map,”
Applied Sciences, vol. 13, p. 13182, Jan. 2023. Number: 24 Publisher:
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[7] A. Merzlyakov, S. Macenski, ”A comparison of modern general-purpose
visual SLAM approaches,” in 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2021, pp. 9190–9197.
[8] Sturm, J., et al, ”A benchmark for the evaluation of RGB-D SLAM
systems,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent
robots and systems, 2012, pp. 573–580.
[9] M. Labbe and F. Michaud, “RTAB-Map as an open-source lidar and
visual simultaneous localization and mapping library for large-scale
and long-term online operation,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 36, p.
416–446, Oct. 2018.
[10] D. Rachmawati and L. Gustin, “Analysis of Dijkstra’s Algorithm and A*
Algorithm in Shortest Path Problem,” Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, vol. 1566, p. 012061, June 2020.
[11] S. Macenski, S. Singh, F. Martin, and J. Gines, “Regulated Pure Pursuit
for Robot Path Tracking,” May 2023.
[12] A. K. Shah, B. Yonzan, L. B. Jayswal, and S. Khadka, Simu-
lation and Real-Time Implementation of Visual SLAM in an In-
door Environment Using a Quadcopter, Bachelor’s thesis, Dept. of
Mechanical and Aerospace Eng., Institute of Engineering (I.O.E.),
Tribhuvan Univ., Lalitpur, Nepal, March 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://hdl.handle.net/20.500.14540/25273
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 16:49:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
