warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1172.pdf
sha256: E6A750342680B5AB251B3E065DC2067607F120D75E32676F2E36BED725435695
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 6
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
IFAC PapersOnLine 55-38 (2022) 49–54
ScienceDirect
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
2405-8963 Copyright © 2022 The Authors. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license.
Peer review under responsibility of International Federation of Automatic Control.
10.1016/j.ifacol.2023.01.132
Copyright © 2022 The Authors. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Operation of civil aircraft requires mandatory regular
inspection in order to detect damages to the surface
structures that could lead to safety risks in the long term if
not remedied. Such defects occur predominantly as a result
of lightning strikes that are conducted along the surface,
leaving material damage, sometimes the size of a pinhead,
at the points of impact and discharge. Manual execution
of the inspection task by speciﬁcally trained staﬀrequires
the usage of bosun’s chairs suspended from ropes and
consequently is a time consuming process, causing long
periods of unavailability of the aircraft and thus high costs
for the airlines. Autonomous UAV oﬀer great potential
for automating the task and signiﬁcantly reducing the
downtimes. Perspectively, the inspection task could be
shifted to the runway and performed directly after landing,
eliminating the need for hangar visits between ﬂights in
case no maintenance is required.
Irregularities, i.e. potential defects of the aircraft surface,
can be detected automatically using CNN feature detec-
tion on camera images, see Konrad et al. (2019). However,
due to the large dimensions of the aircraft surface, global
1. INTRODUCTION
localization of these defect candidates is necessary for easy
spotting and fast manual follow-up examination of the
areas depicted in images that were classiﬁed as defect
positive. Ideally, the creation of a 3D digital twin of the
aircraft is desired for this task. Considering the great
variety of airplane designs, the data-based approach of
incorporating a priori knowledge of the object geometry
should be avoided in the process. Besides, the chosen
approach should preferably work independendly of exter-
nal hardware installations, which would prove diﬃcult in
crowded hangar environments or even more so, on the
runway.
For 3D environmental perception and remote sensing,
there are multiple sensor technology options, such as
stereo cameras (Engel et al. (2015)) or radar (Marck
et al. (2013)). However, stereo cameras are passive sensors,
thus being dependent on the illumination conditions and
therefore rely on external light sources. Additionally, the
camera mounted on the given UAV can take high reso-
lution images but only at speciﬁed triggering times and
oﬀers no continuous data stream. Radar on the other hand
commonly suﬀers from low spatial resolution and a limited
ﬁeld of view. Our approach uses a Velodyne VLP 16 Puck
Keywords: mobile robots, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), environmental perception and
sensing, autonomous robotic systems, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
Abstract: In this paper we propose and evaluate a high resolution intensity yielding adaption
of a 3D mapping approach for airplane inspection by autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles. We
solely use a 16 column laserscanner and an industrial-grade inertial measurement unit, without a
priori knowledge of the inspection object dimensions or its surroundings. Our approach includes
the introduction of a novel cylinder feature detection and an according modiﬁcation of the
optimization-based state estimation. Robustness of the point cloud registration is proven based
on measurements in a GNSS-denied hangar environment with a Boeing 737-500, comprising
only sparse plane and edge features and for highly dynamic movement involving rapid roll
or pitch rotation. The approach is suitable for the given application to datasets with strong
non-Manhattan characteristics, as opposed to several state of the art algorithms. By means
of including the intensity information, 2D projections of the 3D registration result depict a
remarkable level of detail and sharpness, resembling that of camera images. Thus allowing for
complete coverage of the environment with high spatial resolution using the discrete points and
voxel grids with small leaf sizes, the obtained results perspectively can be used for visually
matching multi-channel camera images. By fusion of such visual information with the LiDAR
generated projections and using the LiDAR inertial odometry, 3D defect maps of the aircraft
surface can be constructed, enabling the automated localization of structural damages that are
detectable using convolutional neural networks, as shown in previous publications.
∗Institute of Automatic Control, RWTH Aachen University
Campus-Boulevard 30, 52074 Aachen
e-mail: r.pugliese@irt.rwth-aachen.de
R. Pugliese ∗D. Abel ∗
LiDAR Inertial Mapping of
Non-Manhattan Topologies for UAV-Based
Aircraft Inspection in GNSS-Denied
Environments
[p.2]
50	
R. Pugliese  et al. / IFAC PapersOnLine 55-38 (2022) 49–54
laserscanner that was already used for object detection,
collision avoidance (Pugliese et al. (2019)) and distance
measurement (Pugliese et al. (2021)) for the given appli-
cation in previous publications. Due to the large scale of
the aircraft and the typically low working distances during
the inspection, individual LiDAR sweeps may only depict
small sections of the overall surface, therefore requiring
a mapping approach to register the frames, i.e. estimate
the rigid transformation T b
a ∈SE(3) from LiDAR frame
La to frame Lb, consisting of a rotation Rb
a ∈SO(3) and
a translation pb
a ∈R3 given by the sensor movement, in
order to generate a coherent and complete 3D model.
In recent years, signiﬁcant advancements have been made
on the ﬁeld of LiDAR-based simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM). Particle ﬁlter based approaches (Nie
et al. (2020)) may reach high accuracy but their perfor-
mance heavily depends on the number of particles. In spite
of their inherent suitability for parallelization, for most 6-
DoF problems the computational costs exceed the avail-
able onboard hardware capabilities of mobile robots by
far, restricting the applicability of Monte-Carlo algorithms
primarily to cases in which 2D mapping suﬃces. Zhang and
Singh (2014) proposed LOAM, a LiDAR-only odometry
and mapping approach to which IMU data can be added
optionally, but solely for scan deskewing and not for prob-
abilistic sensor fusion. The algorithm is based on plane
and edge feature detection, yielding excellent results in
Manhattan datasets, i.e. architectures with perpendicular
a ground plans but lacks robustness in environments com-
prising large homogeneous curved surfaces such as aircraft
fuselages and for dynamic roll or pitch movement. LIOM
(Ye et al. (2019)) extends the approach to a tightly coupled
LiDAR inertial sensor fusion and is used as a basis for this
work but it is based on the same feature detection notion
as LOAM, also exhibiting the same weakness. In fact, the
authors reject edge features, stating they cannot improve
the odometry results, which is arguably not universally
applicable to all datasets. LIO-SAM (Shan et al. (2020))
uses a factor graph representation, incorporating GNSS
measurements and loop-closing, while the LiDAR feature
detection remains unchanged. Kumar et al. (2017) propose
a LiDAR inertial mapping and localization approach for
UAV-based pipeline inspection, which requires the perpen-
dicular attachment of two LiDAR sensors that are fused
using Kalman ﬁltering. However, for aircraft inspection
this approach is not applicable as the environment com-
prises only few dominant cylinders that are parallel and
lack angles, namely the fuselage and the engines, thus
undermining global complete observability of the UAV
pose without the usage of additional features.
In this publication we propose a novel modiﬁcation and
extension of LIOM to make it suitable for the application
to datasets with strong non-Manhattan characteristics and
for the given use case in particular. More precisely, we
introduce cylinder feature detection in order to make the
conventional plane and edge features robust to homo-
geneous curved surfaces such as aircraft fuselages. This
involves the computer vision part as well as an adaption
of the cost function of the optimization problem that is
employed for pose and state estimation. In section 2, the
methodology and the adaptions of individual modules of
the framework are presented. The mapping results are then
Fig. 1. Schematic overview of the mapping framework
based on LIOM (Ye et al. (2019)). Modules with
proposed modiﬁcations are highlighted.
given and evaluated based on measurements in a hangar
environment using an external indoor positioning system
(iGPS) as reference in section 3.
2. METHODOLOGY
Fig. 1 shows a ﬂow chart of the chosen mapping approach
according to LIOM. Yellow highlighting of individual mod-
ules indicates proposed modiﬁcations or extensions. In the
following, these adaptions are discussed in the correspond-
ing subsections. For a detailed explanation of the overall
architecture we refer the reader to Ye et al. (2019) as a
thorough description of the framework must be omitted
due to space limitations.
2.1 LiDAR parsing
While not part of the actual SLAM framework, the source
built ROS (Stanford Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory et
al. (2018)) Velodyne driver is modiﬁed to allow parsing of
dual returns. Due to beam divergence, the light emitted
from one of the 16 semiconductor laser diodes may hit
more than one object in a speciﬁc ﬁring interval. Dual
return mode not only registers the strongest return, i.e.
the one with the highest intensity at the IR detector, but
also the latest return in case it diﬀers from the strongest
one. This implicates that the UDP packets arriving from
the sensor have to be parsed at a doubled packet rate of
1508 Hz instead of the common 754 Hz. This allows ob-
taining higher resolution point clouds without increasing
measurement duration at the cost of slower processing.
Note, that rotation frequency in contrast does not aﬀect
data rate. This parameter is usually set to 600 rpm as it
allows for higher azimuthal resolution of individual scans
compared to the maximum value of 1200 rpm. For captur-
ing the high movement dynamics in our practical evalua-
tion (see section 3), rotation speed was set to 1200 rpm.
Nevertheless, we obtain high resolution mapping results.
2.2 Feature Extraction
As a basis, the feature detection from LOAM is used. For
each point xn in each of the 16 Scans Si, i ∈{1, ...16}
[p.3]
	
R. Pugliese  et al. / IFAC PapersOnLine 55-38 (2022) 49–54	
51
contained in a sweep P, a heuristic expression for the local
azimuthal curvature ci,n is calculated according to
ci,n =
1
|Si| · ∥xn∥


m∈Si,m̸=n
(xn −xm)

.
(1)
The points with minimum curvature values below a pre-
deﬁned threshold are selected as planar points, while the
points with maximum values above a ﬁxed threshold are
considered to be edge points. As long as some additional
well-posed boundary conditions limiting for example the
maximum number of extracted points per quadrant are
fulﬁlled, these planar and edge points are extracted as
features. Evidently, horizontal edges cannot be detected
using this approach and homogeneous curved surfaces such
as aircraft fuselages also prove to be problematic. Hence,
the addition of global information about curved surface
geometry to the approach of using individual feature
points is a reasonable idea to overcome these deﬁcits. As
shown previously, the combination of cylinder RANSAC
and intensity-based preﬁltering can be used for aircraft
fuselage segmentation (Pugliese et al. (2021)). Thus, we
propose the calculation of cylinder features according to
algorithm 1, which is implemented using PCL (Rusu and
Cousins (2011)).
Algorithm 1 Cylinder feature extraction
Input: point cloud of current sweep Pk
Output: cylinder cap centers c1,i, c2,i and radii ri, i ∈
1, ...maxcylindercount
1: begin
2:
initialize empty passthrough point cloud Pk,ﬁltered;
3:
for each point xn ∈Pk do
4:
if intensity(xn) < intmax ∧intensity(xn) >
intmin then
5:
Pk,ﬁltered ←Pk,ﬁltered+xn;
6:
end if
7:
end for
8:
build kd-tree on Pk,ﬁltered;
9:
for each point xj ∈Pk,ﬁltered do
10:
perform KNN search around xj;
11:
perform least squares surface normal estimation
at query point xj using Principal Component Analy-
sis;
12:
end for
13:
i = 1;
14:
while i ≤maxcylindercount do
15:
perform cylinder RANSAC on Pk,ﬁltered;
16:
if |Pk,i,inliers| / |Pk| > threshold then
17:
c1,i, c2,i, ri ←estimatedmodelcoeﬃcients;
18:
Pk,ﬁltered ←Pk,ﬁltered −Pk,i,inliers;
19:
i ←i + 1;
20:
else
21:
break;
22:
end if
23:
end while
24: end
2.3 Relative LiDAR measurements
In order to increase the feature density and to facilitate
ﬁnding correspondences, the features within a ﬁxed size
sliding window from the last timestamps {o, ...p, ...i} are
agglomerated in the pivot frame of sweep Pp using the
transformations previously estimated by the optimization.
The relative LiDAR measurements deﬁne the relation be-
tween the features from all frames subsequent to the pivot
frame at timestamps α ∈{p + 1, ...i + 1}, including the
newly arriving current LiDAR sweep Pi+1, to the fea-
tures in the local map. For the plane features the relative
LiDAR measurements mplane,α =

xLα
plane,Lα, nLp, d

are
formed by the feature point in the frame of origin xLα
plane,Lα
combined with the normal vector nLp and the distance
to the origin d of the plane estimated by KNN-search.
The superscript indicates the (LiDAR)-frame in which the
quantities are expressed. For edge features, we can deﬁne
relative LiDAR measurements accordingly as the triplets
medge,α =

xLα
edge,Lα, lLp, xLp
0

(2)
with the unit direction vector of the line segment lLp in
the local map frame and a position vector of a point on
that line segment xLp
0 .
For the introduced cylinder features, the model coeﬃcients
are yielded directly by algorithm 1, rendering parameter
estimation by further KNN-search futile. As opposed to
the relative plane and edge measurements, cylinder fea-
tures do not contain measured feature points from the orig-
inal point cloud, but the cylinder cap centers, which can be
considered virtual measurements. Due to the unknown di-
latation of the cylinders, correspondences between a cylin-
der with radius ra from a frame Lα and the cylinders in
the local map with radii rp,i, i ∈{1, ...maxcylindercount}
are not established based on spatial proximity of the
cap centers but via arg min
i
|rp,i −ra| with the constraint
|rp,i −ra| < rthreshold. We deﬁne the relative LiDAR mea-
surement as
mcyl,α =

cLα
1,Lα, cLα
2,Lα, cLp
1,i, cLp
2,i

.
(3)
2.4 Joint Nonlinear Optimization
The aim of the joint nonlinear optimization is to ﬁnd
a consensus between the LiDAR and inertial predicted
transformations and to estimate the 16-dimensional state
vector
XW
Bk =

pW
Bk vW
Bk
T qW
Bk
T bak
T bωk
T T
,
containing the position pW
Bk, velocity vW
Bk and orientation
described as unit quaternion qW
Bk of the IMU body frame
Bk at timestep k with respect to the world frame W that
is used for constructing the global map. The IMU biases of
accelerometer bak and gyroscope bωk are estimated aswell.
The pose of the body frame w.r.t. the world frame T W
Bk
also yields the pose of the LiDAR frame T W
Lk by using
the extrinsic parameter T L
B that can be speciﬁed as a
ﬁxed value in case the parameter is known or estimated
aswell. Also, not only the current state is estimated but all
states within the optimization window, i.e. all last states
XW
Bk, k ∈{p, ...i + 1} since the timestamp of the pivot
frame, which is known as ﬁxed-lag smoothing.
As the features were modiﬁed previously, the residuals
in the cost function that is minimized for ﬁnding the
[p.4]
52	
R. Pugliese  et al. / IFAC PapersOnLine 55-38 (2022) 49–54
maximum a posteriori probability state estimation have
to be adjusted as well:
arg min
X
1
2


∥rP (X)∥2 +
i+1

α=p+1



mplane,α
∥rplane(mplane,α, X)∥2
Cm
Lα +

medge,α
∥redge(medge,α, X)∥2
Cm
Lα +

mcyl,α
∥rcyl(mcyl,α, X)∥2
Cm
Lα

+
i

β=p
rB(zβ
β+1, X)

2
C
Bβ
Bβ+1



(4)
with the unmodiﬁed priors of the marginalization rP,
residuals of the IMU preintegration rB and residuals of the
plane feature correspondences rplane (point-to-plane dis-
tances). The residuals of the edge feature correspondences
can be derived accordingly as point-to-line distances:
redge(medge,α, X) =
lLp ×

xLp
0
−RLp
LαxLα
edge,Lα + pLp
Lα

(5)
For cylinder features we choose a similair approach of using
the sum of the cap center distances to the cylinder axis in
the pivot frame as residuals since the radii were already
taken into account when establishing the correspondences:
rcyl(mcyl,α, X) =
1
cLP
2,i −cLP
1,i

·
(cLP
2,i −cLP
1,i ) ×

cLP
1,i −RLp
LαcLα
1,Lα + pLp
Lα
 +
(cLP
2,i −cLP
1,i ) ×

cLP
1,i −RLp
LαcLα
2,Lα + pLp
Lα


.
(6)
The optimization problem is solved using Gauss-Newton
algorithm as implemented in Ceres solver (Agarwal et al.
(2022)).
2.5 Global Map Reﬁnement
While in the previous section the states were optimized in
a sliding window, global map reﬁnement properly aligns
the current features with the world map using a second
optimization that is running asynchronously in the back-
end. It is formulated as a second optimization problem, for
which the odometry serves ﬁrst as a prior and its rotational
component is then used as a rotational constraint. This
optimization problem accordingly takes the form
arg min
T W
Lk

mplane,k
rplane(mplane,k, T W
Lk)

2
+

medge,k
redge(medge,k, T W
Lk)

2
+

mcyl,k
rcyl(mcyl,k, T W
Lk)

2
.
(7)
Fig. 2. Parked Boeing 737-500 in the hangar test envi-
ronment, iGPS transmitters are mounted on yellow
tripods.
iGPS receivers
Computing Board
Lord Microstrain
3DM-GX5-25 IMU (hidden)
Aluminium frame
Velodyne VLP-16 LiDAR
Fig. 3. Hardware setup used for the measurements, con-
sisting of LiDAR, IMU, iGPS receivers and a data
logging device.
3. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION
The framework was evaluated by several measurement
runs in a GNSS-denied hangar environment with the
aircraft inspection object depicted in Fig. 2. In order
to investigate higher movement dynamics without safety
concerns, the measurements were carried out manually
using the hardware setup shown in Fig. 3 instead of the
UAV. The mounting is equipped with iGPS receivers,
that enable millimeter precise positioning using several
beacons that were mounted around the test area. This
indoor localization system is used as a reference for the
LiDAR odometry but since it is an optical system with a
very limited ﬁeld of view, only sparse measurements were
available over the duration of the measurement campaign
due to frequently interrupted transmitter receiver line-of-
sight.
Fig. 4 shows the unﬁltered linear acceleration and angular
velocity measured by the IMU. The acceleration measure-
ments contain the share of the gravitational vector that is
visible in the z-component and the movement comprises
high pitch dynamics as the high amplitude oscillation of ωθ
shows. This pitch movement serves the purpose to capture
Fig. 4. Linear acceleration and angular velocity IMU
measurement data.
[p.5]
	
R. Pugliese  et al. / IFAC PapersOnLine 55-38 (2022) 49–54	
53
the entire height of the aircraft with the LiDAR sensor in
spite of the close working distance. At 20 s the measure-
ment was initialized with a rapid turn over of the LiDAR
sensor by 180◦to support precise time synchronization of
LiDAR and IMU data in post-processing.
In Fig. 5 the results of the pose estimation by the Li-
DAR inertial odometry and mapping is shown. By the
two optimizations, we obtain plausible, suﬃciently smooth
position and orientation data over the entire measurement
period without any outliers. Most notably, the position
drift in z-direction at the end of the measurement duration
of 2.5 min is approximately 20 cm, despite the perpetual
pitch oscillation and signiﬁcant yaw rotation. As no loop
closing was employed to obtain these results, start and end
position of the measurement diﬀered and thus, the drift
of the x- and y-component cannot be extracted from the
data. Due to their mm-precision, iGPS measurements can
be used as ground thruth for position in the hangar, when
available. To compare the results of the LiDAR inertial
SLAM to the iGPS reference however, the unknown rigid
3D transformation between the iGPS coordinate frame
and the world frame W of the global map from equation 7
has to be determined. This can be considered a registration
problem aswell, not of LiDAR scans but of the N sparse
iGPS 3D position measurements piGPS
k
, k ∈{1, ...N} to
the dense odometry position estimates pW
Bk. One possi-
bility to solve this problem is coarse manual alignment,
followed by Iterative Closest Point (ICP, Besl and McKay
(1992)). However, as the positions are part of trajecto-
ries and hence timestamped, point correspondences are
already known and there is no necessity for the ICP heuris-
tic. Therefore, the solution for ﬁnding the least-squares-
optimal transformation can be given in closed form as
follows in accordance to Eggert et al. (1997):
(1) Translate both point clouds so that their respective
centroids lie in the origin:
˜piGPS
k
= piGPS
k
−¯piGPS
∀k ∈{1, ...N}
˜pW
Bk
= pW
Bk −¯pW
B
∀k ∈{1, ...N}
(8)
with ¯piGPS = 1
N
N

k=1
piGPS
k
, ¯pW
B = 1
N
N

k=1
pW
Bk
(2) Construct the point scatter matrices:
P iGPS =

˜piGPS
1
˜piGPS
2
... ˜piGPS
N

P W
B =

˜pW
B1 ˜pW
B2 ... ˜pW
BN

(9)
(3) The rotation RW
iGPS of the optimal rigid transforma-
tion between the two coordinate frames can then be
obtained by singular value decomposition:
RW
iGPS = V U T , with P iGPSP W
B
T = UΣV T
(10)
(4) Lastly, the translation tW
iGPS of the optimal rigid
transformation follows with the above result:
tW
iGPS = ¯pW
B −RW
iGPS¯piGPS
(11)
The coordinate-transformed iGPS-measurements are indi-
cated as orange circles in Fig. 5, proving that the positions
from the pose estimates of the LiDAR inertial odometry
and mapping are valid. The RMS-value of the position
errors is 25.0 cm and their arithmetic mean 21.2 cm.
For defect map generation however, the mapping result
is more relevant than the state estimation. In Fig. 6 the
Fig. 5. Position and heading of the LiDAR estimated poses
and comparison to coordinate-transformed iGPS mea-
surements.
Fig. 6. Resulting point cloud map from measurement 1.
registration result is given with color coded z-coordinate.
But the 3D map is most useful, when visualizing the
LiDAR measured intensity of the returns: points are col-
ored using grayscale, where white color (value 255 in 8-
bit brightness representation) equals maximum intensity.
The results are shown in Fig. 7. As stated initially, the
depicted 2D-projections of the map from a variety of angles
display a level of detail that is remotely comparable to
single-channel camera images plus the beneﬁt of precise
3D referencing of each point, which is an unexpected
result for a UAV-suitable 16-layer laserscanner. In Fig.
8 the mapping results are given for a second test run
with a diﬀerent trajectory. Contrast was enhanced for
better visualization of the few remaining blind spots of
the map that could be compensated by more thorough
scanning. All mapping results in Fig. 6-8 were created
solely using the SLAM approach without employing the
external positioning data. In future work, the resulting 3D
maps could be further improved by including loop closure
and should be merged with high resolution camera pictures
and CNN-based image classiﬁcation for convenient defect
localization.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the contribution of the
joint research project AMIIGO supported by the Indus-
trial Research Association DFMRS e.V. (grant-no. 19477
N) with aid of the German Federal Ministry of Economic
Aﬀairs and Energy in compliance with a resolution of the
German Bundestag. Special thanks go to Thomas Konrad
from IRT for his contributions to the project and its
management and to the ﬁeld of autonomous UAV.
[p.6]
54	
R. Pugliese  et al. / IFAC PapersOnLine 55-38 (2022) 49–54
Fig. 7. High resolution 3D point cloud mapping result from
measurement 1 with grayscale-coded intensity.
REFERENCES
Agarwal,
S.,
Mierle,
K.,
and
The
Ceres
Solver
Team
(2022).
Ceres
Solver.
URL
https://github.com/ceres-solver/ceres-solver.
Besl, P.J. and McKay, N.D. (1992). A method for regis-
tration of 3-d shapes. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 14(2), 239–256.
Eggert, D.W., Lorusso, A., and Fisher, R.B. (1997). Es-
timating 3-d rigid body transformations: a comparison
of four major algorithms. Machine Vision and Applica-
tions, 9, 272–290.
Engel, J., St¨uckler, J., and Cremers, D. (2015).
Large-
scale direct slam with stereo cameras. IEEE/RSJ Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 1935–1942.
Konrad, T., Lohmann, L., and Abel, D. (2019). Surface
defect detection for automated inspection systems using
convolutional neural networks. The 27th Mediterranean
Conference on Control and Automation, 75–80.
Kumar, G.A., Patil, A.K., Patil, R., Park, S.S., and
Chai, Y.H. (2017). A lidar and imu integrated indoor
navigation system for uavs and its application in real-
time pipeline classiﬁcation. Sensors (Basel), 17, 109–
111.
Marck, J.W., Mohamoud, A., vd Houwen, E., and van Hei-
jster, R. (2013). Indoor radar slam a radar application
for vision and gps denied environments. European Radar
Conference, 471–474.
Nie, F., Zhang, W., Yao, Z., Shi, Y., Li, F., and Huang,
Q. (2020). Lcpf: A particle ﬁlter lidar slam system with
loop detection and correction. IEEE Access, 8, 20401–
20412.
Fig. 8. High resolution 3D point cloud mapping result from
measurement 2 with grayscale-coded intensity.
Pugliese, R., Konrad, T., and Abel, D. (2021).
Lidar-
aided relative and absolute localization for automated
uav-based inspection of aircraft fuselages. IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Multisensor Fusion and Integra-
tion for Intelligent Systems, 1–6.
Pugliese, R., Konrad, T., Zweigel, R., and Abel, D. (2019).
Object detection and potential ﬁeld-based trajectory
planning on lidar 3d-point clouds for uav in uncertain
environments. 32nd International Technical Meeting of
the Satellite Division of the Institute of Navigation (ION
GNSS+), 2622–2636.
Rusu, R.B. and Cousins, S. (2011).
3d is here: Point
cloud library (pcl). IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 1–4.
Shan, T., Englot, B., Meyers, D., Wang, W., Ratti, C.,
and Rus, D. (2020). Lio-sam: Tightly-coupled lidar in-
ertial odometry via smoothing and mapping. IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems (IROS), 5135–5142.
Stanford Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory et al. (2018).
Robotic operating system, ros melodic morenia. URL
https://www.ros.org.
Ye, H., Chen, Y., and Liu, M. (2019).
Tightly coupled
3d lidar inertial odometry and mapping. IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
3144–3150.
Zhang, J. and Singh, S. (2014). Loam: Lidar odometry and
mapping in real-time.
Robotics: Science and Systems
Conference (RSS), 109–111.
=== END ===
