warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1189.pdf
sha256: D72B5F40FCE7546383CAE0D1AB2BFCEC3B207C16A6D6A83EAC0A8149AC6D9852
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 23
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-023-01855-w
REGULAR PAPER
Leonardo Drone Contest Autonomous Drone Competition: Overview,
Results, and Lessons Learned from Politecnico di Milano Team
Gabriele Roggi1
· Salvatore Meraglia1 · Marco Lovera1
Received: 27 October 2022 / Accepted: 16 March 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
In this paper, the Politecnico di Milano solutions proposed for the Leonardo Drone Contest (LDC) are presented. The Leonardo
Drone Contest is an annual autonomous drone competition among universities, which has already seen the conclusion of its
second edition. In each edition, the participating teams were asked to design and build an autonomous multicopter, capable of
accomplishing complex tasks in an indoor urban-like environment. To reach this goal, the designed systems should be capable
of navigating in a Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS)-denied environment with autonomous decision making, online
planning and collision avoidance capabilities. In this light, the authors describe the ﬁrst two editions of the competition,
i.e., their rules, objectives and overview of the proposed solutions. While the ﬁrst edition is presented as relevant for the
experience and takeaways acquired from it, the second edition solution is analyzed in detail, providing both the simulation
and experimental results obtained.
Keywords Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) · Autonomous systems · Mobile robotics · Competition
1 Introduction
In recent years, the research on autonomous Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) has seen great interest. Autonomous
systems can play an important role in many applications,
e.g., search-and-rescue [43], inspection [35], surveillance
[14] and mapping [17].
Autonomous UAVs, as many other robot systems, are
composed of the standard building blocks of state estimation,
control, mapping and planning. In the latest years, as com-
putational power grew and more efﬁcient algorithms were
proposed, vision started to be used for state estimation of
aerial vehicles [6, 10]. With the improvement of vision algo-
rithms, e.g., [20, 34], ﬂight in unstructured 3D environments
became possible [15, 42, 44], and cameras are now the most
used sensor for state estimation in aerial vehicles [32]. In
B Gabriele Roggi
gabriele.roggi@polimi.it
Salvatore Meraglia
salvatore.meraglia@polimi.it
Marco Lovera
marco.lovera@polimi.it
1
Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Aerospaziali,
Politecnico di Milano, Via La Masa 34, Milano 20158, Italy
order to move in an partially known or unknown environ-
ment, a robot, in addition to having reliable and robust state
estimation and control algorithms, needs to build an accurate
map and generate collision-free trajectories on the map itself.
These aspects have been tackled by different research groups,
e.g., [36, 53]. Recently, advancements in all these research
directionswereintegratedinfullyautonomousUAVscapable
of ﬂying relying only on onboard sensors, even in cluttered
environments. In this regard, in [32], the authors designed a
fullnavigationsystemallowingthedronetoreachagoalloca-
tion, while avoiding obstacles. At the same time, in [37], the
authors developed a vision-based autonomous UAV capable
of GNSS-denied navigation, contributing also to important
advancements for 3D global planning on real maps and local
planning with re-planning capabilities.
At the same time, in the robotics community, there has
been a signiﬁcant growth in the number of challenge prizes
and competitions. This has been done with the aim of stimu-
lating innovation to meet a deﬁned challenge and to provide
solutions to problems that matter to roboticists and society
[13].
In particular, drone racing has seen autonomous systems
catching up fast with human performance. In this framework,
while the ﬁrst drone racing competition has been organized
during the IROS conference in 2016 [33], the most important
123
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23 
/ Published online: 13 June 2023
[p.2]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
event has been the 2019 Lockheed Martin AlphaPilot chal-
lenge [1]. This challenge led to the ﬁrst season of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Robotic Racing (AIRR), co-organized with the
Drone Racing League (DRL) for human pilots [12]. In the
literature, some of the approaches taken by the teams during
this competition are available, e.g., [11, 18] and [38]. Other
than drone racing, autonomous UAVs have been object of
competitions in several conferences, e.g., IMAV (Interna-
tional Micro Air Vehicle) [40], and in the Mohamed Bin
Zayed International Robotic Challenge (MBZIRC) [4]. In
this context, a variety of autonomous drone operations has
been explored ranging from wall building [31] to ground
ﬁres extinguishing [52] and from baloon popping [8] to the
capture of other ﬂying objects [51].
With similar objectives, namely to encourage the devel-
opment of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) applied to Unmanned
Aerial Systems (UAS), Leonardo S.p.A. designed and
launched, the Leonardo Drone Contest [3] in collaboration
with six Italian universities: Politecnico di Milano, Politec-
nico di Torino, Università di Bologna, Scuola Superiore
Sant’Anna di Pisa, Università degli Studi di Roma Tor Ver-
gata and Università degli Studi Federico II di Napoli.
The universities’ teams have been engaged for three
years in the development of autonomous drone systems. The
designed multicopter should be capable of navigating in a
GNSS-denied environment with autonomous decision mak-
ing, online planning and collision avoidance capabilities. It is
worthalsomentioningthatnoLiDARscannerswereallowed,
meaning that for navigation and planning only visual sensors
or range ﬁnders could have been employed.
Some of the contributions of this paper are:
• We provide two different hardware and software solu-
tions for fully autonomous UAVs, addressing, in par-
ticular, indoor GNSS-denied navigation and collision
avoidance in cluttered environments.
• We present a navigation solution for environments
equipped with visual markers. The employed approach is
shown as able to provide accurate position state estimates
over long ﬂights.
• With respect to relevant literature on fully autonomous
UAV architectures, we also present a decision making
layer for making the drone perform complex tasks.
• For each competition, we provide educational contri-
butions describing the technical challenges faced and
possible solutions.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sections 2 and 3,
the ﬁrst and second competition formats and rules are respec-
tively presented. For each competition, the hardware setup
and an overview of the software solution are introduced.
For the ﬁrst edition, we highlight some takeaways for future
developments, while, in Section 4, the solution proposed for
the second edition is presented in detail, discussing each
of the implemented sub-modules, i.e., navigation, decision
making and planning and control. In Section 5, we brieﬂy
describe the simulation environment and we present the
experimental setting. Then, in Section 6, the results obtained
in both simulations and experimental activities are discussed.
Finally, in Section 7, the encountered technical challenges
andtheplannedfutureactivitiesaresummarized.Wereferthe
reader to our previous work [39], where the results obtained
during the second contest itself are shown. Compared to the
previous publication, this one discusses the selection of the
employed open source libraries and adds details to the solu-
tion implementation. Furthermore, this paper also presents
the architecture proposed for the ﬁrst competition, highlight-
ing the issues and lessons learned. This work also describes
the simulation environment employed for the development of
the solution and the results obtained on it. Finally, since in the
competition no motion capture system was available, experi-
ments have been performed in a laboratory environment with
ground-truth for assessing localization and mapping perfor-
mance.
Notation We deﬁne frames and notations that are used
throughout the paper. We indicate the map frame with {M},
i.e., an East-North-Up (ENU) ﬁxed frame; {O} represents the
odom frame, i.e., an ENU frame which drifts over time with
respect to {M}; {B} is a Forward-Left-Up (FLU) body-ﬁxed
frame; {C} is the camera-ﬁxed frame and {T} is the visual
marker-ﬁxed frame. RA/B ∈SO(3) is the rotation matrix
describing the attitude of the {A} frame with respect to the
{B} frame, while pA/B ∈R3 is the position of the frame
{A} with respect to frame {B}, resolved in {B}.
2 First Competition: Format
The ﬁrst edition of the Leonardo Drone Contest took place in
Turin on 17-18 September 2020. The competition was held
in the indoor urban-like environment, shown in Fig. 1.
The ﬁeld dimensions were 20m×10m×3m and it was
delimited by a net. The obstacles were at most three meters
high with passages of at least one meter among them. The
obstacles’ shape, dimension and position were unknown. Six
poles of different colors were placed at known positions on
the ﬁeld as represented in Fig. 2.
The contest was composed of two phases, held respec-
tively in the two days of the competition. In the ﬁrst phase,
the drone had the aim of exploring autonomously the envi-
ronment. At the same time, the drone task was to localize 10
QR codes, serving also as landing pads for the second phase.
The landing pad was made of a 1m×1m blue square contain-
ing a 50cm×50cm QR marker. The QR markers contained
a unique alphanumeric string each.
123
23
Page 2 of 23
[p.3]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 1 The real competition
ﬁeld in Turin consisting of
cardboard buildings with glued
textures (from [3])
Just before the start of the second day, the teams were
given a list of 5 QR codes by the competition judges. This
list indicated the ordered sequence of pads to be reached by
the drone and on which it was meant to land. Hence, the teams
had the opportunity of planning an optimized path and upload
it on the drone. The team performing the largest number
of consecutive valid landings would have been identiﬁed as
the winner. Note that a landing was considered valid if all
the drone’s contact points with the ground were inside the
1m×1m landing pad.
2.1 Hardware Setup
The drone, speciﬁcally designed for the competition and
developed in collaboration with the Politecnico di Milano
spin-off company ANT-X [2], codename ROG-1, is a coax-
ial octocopter (Fig. 3). Its dimensions are 500×500×300mm
for a takeoff weight of 3.75kg. The drone is equipped with
a Pixhawk 4 Flight Control Unit (FCU) and an NVIDIA Jet-
son TX2 companion computer mounted on a Connect Tech
Orbitty Carrier board. It is powered by a 16 000mAh 4S Lipo
battery, reaching a total ﬂight time of 19 minutes.
Fig. 2 Rendering example of the competition ﬁeld indicating positions
and colors of poles
The sensor suite is composed by a forward-looking Stere-
olabs ZED stereo camera inclined slightly downward (15
degrees with respect to the horizontal plane), a downward-
looking OpenMV H7 Plus monocular camera and a Ter-
aRanger Tower Evo equipped with 8 TeraRanger Evo 60m
range ﬁnders.
2.2 Software and Algorithms Overview
Firstofall,theRobotOperatingSystem(ROS)wasemployed
as framework for all the high-level software running on the
UAV. For what concerns state estimation, since no GNSS
signal was available, stereo visual odometry was used for
determining the position and heading of the drone, which
was then fused with the Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU)
information for obtaining an estimate of the drone pose in
the odom frame. Note that, while the visual odometry was
computed on the companion computer, the fusion process
wascarriedoutontheFCUusingtheEKF2,i.e.,theExtended
Kalman Filter available on the PX41 ﬁrmware.
The open source RTAB-Map package [29] was employed
for the localization in the map frame, using as input the
stereo camera images. RTAB-Map stands for Real-Time
Appearance-Based Mapping and it is a RGB-D, Stereo and
LiDAR graph-based SLAM approach, in which loop closures
are found using a bag-of-word approach (see [28] for more
details). Note that the map produced by the RTAB-Map algo-
rithm in the ﬁrst phase of the competition was saved in the
form of an Octomap [25].
An alternative localization solution, based on the colored
poles, was originally designed. In this respect, the condi-
tions of the competition resembled the Robocups. In the
literature, many different localization approaches for these
competitions were available [24, 48]. We implemented an
EKF-localization approach, similar to [47], which exploited
1 https://px4.io/
123
Page 3 of 23
23
[p.4]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 3 The UAV platform for
LDC ﬁrst edition (ROG-1)
visual odometry in the kinematic model and the colored
poles as visual landmarks. Distance, elevation and azimuth
of the landmarks were computed via color segmentation and
bounding box computation on monocular cameras’ images.
Even if the approach showed good performance in a sim-
ulation environment, which will be presented in Section 5,
the solution was not implemented on the platform due to the
following limitations. First, the solution would have required
additional cameras to properly work. Possible occlusions due
to the obstacles present on the ﬁeld limited greatly the amount
of measurements obtained, leading to the need of increasing
the available ﬁeld of view. Processing more camera images
would have also implied a greater computation overhead for
the overall system. Furthermore, while the azimuth and ele-
vation were very accurate, distance estimates were not. This
aspect limited the accuracy of the proposed solution. The
robustness of the solution was also difﬁcult to assess, since
it was not possible to test the system on the competition
ﬁeld before the actual contest. A concern regarded possible
changes in lighting conditions, which could have led to issues
in the color segmentation task. Finally, adopting this strategy
would have reduced the generality of the solution and limited
its deployment in other application domains.
Two different planning algorithms were used depending
on the phase of the competition considered. During the explo-
ration phase, the Receding Horizon Next Best View Planner
[9] was employed. Starting from stereo camera images, the
aim of this algorithm was to produce a collision-free path
from the current pose to the viewpoint which maximized
the acquired knowledge of the environment. The computed
path, in the form of a list of position set-points, was then
sent to the FCU through mavros2. While the environment
was explored, the downward-looking monocular camera was
used for detecting the QR codes scattered around the ﬁeld.
At the same time, the QR codes’ positions were computed
and saved, given the best estimate of the drone position in
the map reference frame. The overall system architecture for
this phase is depicted in Fig. 4.
In the second day, once the list of landing pads to be
reached was known, a path was planned using an ofﬂine A∗,
which took as input the retrieved Octomap. The path was
then uploaded on the UAV. On-board the UAV an online local
planner was running. Its aim was to avoid possible collisions,
which could arise due to uncertainties in both the map and
the UAV state estimate. The local planner was an implemen-
tation of Vector Field Histogram (VFH∗) [49], which utilized
the range information coming from the TeraRanger Tower.
Due to the planar nature of the sensor, a 2D implementation
of the planner was used, even if a 3D extension was pro-
posed in the literature [50]. The resulting architecture for the
landing phase is shown in Fig. 5.
As far as the results were concerned, on the ﬁrst day, the
UAV autonomously explored about 60% of the competition
ﬁeld, ﬁnding 7 out of the 10 QR markers placed on the ﬁeld.
On the second day, 4 out of 5 valid landings were performed,
of which 3 consecutive, leading to the best result obtained
2 https://github.com/mavlink/mavros
123
23
Page 4 of 23
[p.5]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 4 System architecture for
the exploration phase
Fig. 5 System architecture for
the landing phase
123
Page 5 of 23
23
[p.6]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
and the win for our team. Despite the achievements, some
problems were evident:
• The major problem was related to the altitude estimation.
The visual odometry showed a very strong drift and the
SLAM algorithm was not able to compensate for it, lead-
ing to considerable variations in the altitude kept by the
drone.
• While the local planner was successful for collision
avoidance, it showed some problems in cluttered envi-
ronments. The local nature of the algorithm made the
vehicle, sometimes, unable to reach the goal, starting to
visit the same place over and over. In addition to this,
sub-optimal paths, in terms of distance travelled, were
often selected.
3 Second Competition: Format
The second edition took place in Turin on 28-30 September
2021, in an indoor environment similar to the one of the pre-
vious competition. The contest was composed of four rounds
over three days. In each round the drone had to autonomously
take off and explore the environment searching for a speciﬁc
ground robot, which in turn carried information about the
task the drone had to perform. It is worth pointing out that,
this time, some initial knowledge of the ﬁeld was given to
the teams in the form of a map, with associated East-North
reference frame, as shown in Fig. 6.
As in the ﬁrst year competition, the ﬁeld dimensions were
20m×10m, with a maximum available height of 3m (due
to a net on top of the ﬁeld). The heights of the obstacles
in the map were also known. The numbered squares on the
map represented the landing pads, which were 1m×1m cyan
squares each containing a 50cm×50cm ArUco marker (with
corresponding identiﬁer).
Three ground robots (in the form of vacuum cleaners),
each identiﬁed by a unique 19cm×19cm ArUco marker
(ranging from 21 to 26), were moving randomly in unknown
conﬁned regions on the ﬁeld. The information provided by
the robots were given in the form of a string of 10 digits from
0 to 9. The i-th number indicated the reward associated with
a valid landing on the landing pad identiﬁed by ArUco num-
ber i. The ground robot with the available information and
an example of landing pad are shown in Fig. 7.
Two ground robots, whose identiﬁcation ArUco code
numbers were communicated to the team before starting the
round, were collaborative agents. The remaining one was the
intruder that carried the exact rewards associated to each
landing. The drone exploration was assisted by a ﬁxed pan-
tilt-zoom(PTZ)cameraplacedincorrespondenceofthecross
icon in Fig. 6, which could be controlled by the teams. After
having found the intruder robot, the drone had to send a visi-
ble picture of the rewards to the team’s ground control station.
This action had to be executed within 30 minutes from the
start of the round. At this point, the sequence of landing spots
to maximize the reward had to be selected. There were no
requirements for the computation of the sequence. Indeed,
the sequence could be either selected by the team based on
their judgement or it could be computed through an opti-
mization problem. After having determined the sequence, the
drone had to reach and land on top of the pads in the given
order. The landing was considered valid if all the UAV con-
tact points with the ground were inside the 1m×1m square.
The points corresponding to valid landings were summed up
for obtaining the round result. The team obtaining the highest
amount of points in the three (out of four) best rounds was
proclaimed the winner. It is worth pointing out that, in each
round, the UAV takeoff position was represented by a different
Fig. 6 Initial knowledge of the
environment
123
23
Page 6 of 23
[p.7]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 7 The ground robot and landing pad
landing pad, communicated to the teams before the start of
the run. The reward string and the ground robots’ region of
motion varied across rounds.
3.1 Hardware Setup
The UAV platform, designed as evolution of the drone which
competed in the ﬁrst edition, was developed in collabora-
tion with ANT-X as well. It is again a coaxial octocopter
(Fig. 8), codename ROG-2, but with a different propulsion
system. Its dimensions and weight has been reduced leading
respectively to a 430×300×200mm drone weighing 3.03kg
at takeoff. While the Pixhawk 4 FCU has been adopted again,
the companion computer has been replaced with the more
Fig. 8 The UAV platform for LDC second edition (ROG-2)
powerful NVIDIA Jetson Xavier NX. This second platform
is equipped with the same battery of the previous version and
it reaches a total ﬂight time of about 20 minutes.
The sensor suite is composed by a forward-looking Stere-
olabs ZED stereo camera inclined slightly downward (15
degrees with respect to the horizontal plane), a Lidar-Lite
v3 laser range ﬁnder and two OpenMV H7 Plus monocular
cameras, one forward-looking and one downward-looking.
3.2 Software and Algorithms Overview
Some software components were kept for this improved solu-
tion. The ROS framework was still used, thanks also to the
capabilities of publishing and receiving messages through
TCP transport, which allowed to run a subset of the nodes
on the companion computer and some on the ground con-
trol station. In particular, the ground control station was used
for the teleoperation of the ﬁxed PTZ camera and for send-
ing the sequence of landing pads to be visited by the drone.
Clearly, the control station was also employed for receiving
and visualizing telemetry data.
For state estimation purposes, the same solution was
adopted. However, in order to enhance the accuracy of the
altitude estimation, in this competition edition, a range ﬁnder
was employed as an altimeter. A localization algorithm was
custom developed for computing an estimate of the drone
position in the map frame. To reach this goal, the known
positions of the ArUcos in the world map and the downward-
looking monocular camera images were exploited.
This time, the RTAB-Map algorithm was only used for
mapping purposes. The resulting map, in the form of an
Octomap, has been employed for planning collision-free
paths and trajectories to be fed to the PX4 drone controller.
The planner module, running online and on-board the
robot, was composed by a Djikstra’s global planner and an A∗
local planner. The global planner was meant for computing
a list of intermediate waypoints for reaching the goal using
the a priori information on the environment. The local plan-
ner, as opposed to the ﬁrst competition, relied only on visual
information, without the need of additional range ﬁnders.
Note also that an additional forward-looking monocular
camera was equipped to search for ground robots. This cam-
era acquired images at a different resolution with respect to
the stereo camera used for navigation. In this framework, a
decision making algorithm has been custom developed for
identifying waypoints to be reached in order to maximize
the probability of ﬁnding the ground robots. The algorithm
had access to information coming from both the monocular
cameras available on-board and on the ﬁxed PTZ camera.
123
Page 7 of 23
23
[p.8]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
4 Second Competition: Detailed Solution
In this section, the proposed solution for the second edition
of the contest is presented in detail. The overall architecture
is composed by three main subsystems:
• Navigation. It takes as inputs the sensor measurements
and returns as outputs the drone pose in the map frame
and a global map.
• Decision-making. It manages the high-level objectives
of the mission. It takes as inputs preliminary information
on the environment and outputs the desired goal posi-
tions.
• Planning and control. The global map and the goal
positions are used for planning collision free paths and
trajectories to be fed to the drone controller.
4.1 Navigation
First of all, multiple ROS-compatible implementations have
been analyzed for computing the visual odometry given the
stereo images coming from the ZED stereo camera. In par-
ticular, we have considered:
• RTAB-Map, which was already presented for its visual
SLAM implementation. The package also provides a
stereovisualodometry pipeline (no loop closing enabled),
which is the one we will consider in this analysis.
• ORB-SLAM2 [34] is a graph-based stereo visual SLAM
algorithm compatible with monocular, stereo and RGB-
D cameras. The SLAM system is based on keyframes
containing a set of features and the camera pose. A local
and global Bundle Adjustment (BA) are used to correct
a recent set of keyframes and to optimize the map and
trajectory respectively.
• LibViso2 [21] is a feature-based VO library for monocu-
lar and stereo cameras. Features are extracted by ﬁltering
the images with a corner and blob mask and performing
non-maximum and non-minimum suppression on the ﬁl-
tered images.
• ZED-VO is the proprietary visual odometry software pro-
vided in the ZED SDK3.
Given a stereo odometry implementation, its position and
yaw output are then fused in the EKF2. The EKF2 returns
the estimates of position and attitude of the UAV in the odom
frame, pB/O = [px, py, pz]⊤and RB/O respectively, which
will be used for feedback control.
For what concerns the localization, a Kalman Filter (KF),
which fuses information coming from drone’s odometry,
3 https://www.stereolabs.com/developers/release/
monocular cameras images and laser altimeter, has been
implemented. The state of the ﬁlter is the bias term x =
bM/O = [bx, by, bz]⊤that is the difference between the posi-
tion of the robot in the odom reference frame and the map
reference frame.
Assuming the evolution of the bias as a random walk pro-
cess, the motion model results:
˙x = ˙bM/O = ηw,
(1)
where ηw is a white Gaussian noise with Power Spectral
Density (PSD) Sw(ω) = W. We write it in discrete time
state space form as:
xk = Fxk−1 + wk−1,
(2)
where F = I, i.e., the identity matrix, and wk ∼N(0, Q) is
a Gaussian random vector with covariance Q.
The images from the forward-looking and downward-
looking cameras are analyzed through an ArUco marker
detector based on the OpenCV4 library. Once a marker
related to a landing pad has been detected, its position with
respect to the camera, written in the camera frame, is com-
puted. The measurement model at instant k has been written
as:
yc = pT /C
(3)
= RB/C(R⊤
B/M(pT /M −(pB/O + bM/O)))+ pB/C + vc,
wherevc is azeromeanGaussianwhitenoisewithcovariance
Rc: vc ∼N(0, Rc). This operation is possible by knowing
the ArUco marker position pT /M in the approximate world
map and assuming RB/M = RB/O. This was justiﬁed by
the fact that the attitude RB/O showed a very slow drift dur-
ing the experimental campaign carried out inside the Flying
Arena for Rotorcraft Technologies (FlyART) of Politecnico
di Milano.
In order to increase the altitude estimation accuracy, the
laser altimeter measurements are also used. The measure-
ment model at instant k is:
yl = bz + pz + vl,
(4)
where vl ∼N(0, Rl) is a zero mean white Gaussian noise
with covariance Rl. However, this model does not take into
account the presence of obstacles on the ﬁeld. Thus, when
ﬂying over obstacles, the measured distance does not cor-
respond to the UAV altitude. To overcome this issue, a
measurement outliers detector has been applied to interrupt
the fusion process whenever the drone ﬂies over an obsta-
cle. Note that a similar approach has been also employed in
4 https://opencv.org/
123
23
Page 8 of 23
[p.9]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
the attempt of reconstructing the scale of monocular vision
using range ﬁnder information in [16]. Our method was also
used for rejecting possible outliers in the ArUco relative pose
estimates. In particular, this check is performed through a χ2-
test based on the Mahalanobis distance of the measurement
innovation [41].
Writing in state space form the measurement model
obtained combining (3) and (4), we have:
yk = [yc, yl]⊤
k = Cxk + vk,
(5)
with vk = [vc, vl]⊤
k . Furthermore, we group the measure-
ment noise covariance matrices as:
R =
Rc 0
0 Rl

.
(6)
Writing the ﬁlter in the usual prediction-correction form,
the following equations have been employed:
ˆx−
k = F ˆx+
k−1
P−
k = F P+
k−1F⊤+ Q
zk = yk −Hk ˆx−
k
Zk = Hk P−
k H⊤
k + R
Kk = P−
k H⊤
k Z−1
k
ˆx+
k = ˆx−
k + Kkzk
P+
k = (I −Kk Hk)P−
k .
where P−and P+ are the a priori and a posteriori state
estimationerrorcovariancematricesrespectively,and ˆx−and
ˆx+ are the a priori and a posteriori estimates of the state.
Inliers are validated by checking the Normalized Esti-
mation Error Squared (NEES) after the computation of zk,
namely:
z⊤
k Z−1
k zk ≤χ2
th,
(7)
with χ2
th equal to the 0.95 probability quantile of the χ2 dis-
tribution. If the measurement passes the test, we proceed by
computingtheKalmangain Kk andbyupdatingtheﬁlterstate
and covariance, otherwise the measurement is discarded.
Finally, knowing the drone pose in the map frame given by
the localization and having the ZED point cloud, RTAB-Map
is used for producing a 3D map in the form of an Octomap.
The overall navigation architecture is depicted in Fig. 9.
4.2 Decision-making
The decision-making module is responsible for assigning the
waypoints to the planning and control module. In particular,
the waypoints are computed through different approaches
based on the output of a state machine, which manages the
different phases of the competition. The workﬂow of the
state machine and associated inputs are shown in Fig. 10
and described in the following.
When the operator sends the starting signal, the decision-
making module provides a takeoff setpoint.
After takeoff, the UAV is supposed to ﬁnd the intruder
robot. The problem at hand, in general terms, can be formu-
lated as the one of ﬁnding an optimal patrolling strategy [7].
Despite the existence of solutions to this problem in similar
frameworks [26, 27], our problem can be simpliﬁed consid-
ering the fact that the ground robots to be monitored are
constrained to move in relatively small areas. As a conse-
quence, the drone does not need to visit multiple times the
same area for verifying if an intruder has appeared. Thus, the
problem can be treated as an art gallery problem or coverage
planning problem in a known environment [23, 46]. In this
work, we propose a greedy approach for steering the UAV
towards the area of the ﬁeld where the probability of ﬁnd-
ing a ground robot is greater. In the state machine of Fig. 10
this procedure is called probabilistic exploration. At each
iteration, this algorithm outputs the (x, y) coordinates which
maximize the probability of ﬁnding the intruder robot (the
z-coordinate of the generated waypoints will be equal to the
drone ﬂight altitude). The probability values are stored in a
grid map of 1m resolution. This probability map, denoted as
Pmap, is initialized considering the approximate world map
of Fig. 6 and the following assumptions:
1. The ground robots will not be positioned on obstacles or
too close to them.
2. It will be more likely to ﬁnd the ground robots in large
open spaces.
Thus, the initial probability values are computed based
on the number of free, i.e., with no obstacles, contiguous
cells. A graphical representation of the initial map is shown
in Fig. 11.
During the environment exploration, the information com-
ing from all the available cameras, i.e., downward-looking
and forward-looking cameras available on-board and the
ﬁxed PTZ camera, are used for updating the probability val-
ues. In particular, under certain conditions, the probability
values of some cells are decreased to a user deﬁned value.
As a consequence, the probability values of the other cells
in the map will increase to have an overall properly deﬁned
probability distribution (for a more detailed description, see
Algorithm 1). The algorithm takes as input the initial proba-
bility map Pmap.
At each iteration, the images coming from the cameras
are processed searching for ArUco markers corresponding
to ground robots. If one of these ﬁducial markers is found,
123
Page 9 of 23
23
[p.10]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 9 Navigation architecture
Fig. 10 Decision making
architecture
123
23
Page 10 of 23
[p.11]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 11 Initial probability map
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Algorithm 1 Probabilistic exploration.
Input Pmap
Output waypoint
1: while intruder is not found do
2:
Process image and compute pT /C and arucoid
3:
if not arucoid then
4:
Pmap = DiscountCameraFovs(Pmap)
5:
wp = BestWaypoint(Pmap)
6:
return wp
7:
else
8:
if arucoid is intruder then
9:
pT /M = Camera2Map(pT /C)
10:
wp = pT /M
11:
return wp
12:
else
13:
pT /M = Camera2Map(pT /C)
14:
Pmap = DiscountArea(Pmap, pT /M)
15:
wp = BestWaypoint(Pmap)
16:
return wp
17:
end if
18:
end if
19: end while
the corresponding identiﬁedarucoid and position in the cam-
era frame pT /C are retrieved. If the arucoid is the intruder
one, i.e., not one of the two identiﬁcation numbers communi-
cated before the start of the round, the probability exploration
algorithm outputs the waypoint corresponding to the position
occupied by the ground robot in the map and terminates (the
decision-making module will shift to the tracking phase). In
this regard, the Camera2Map function is employed for ﬁnd-
ing the position of the ArUCo in the map frame, given its
position in the camera frame. This can be done by applying
the inverse measurement model of equation (3), namely:
pT /M = pB/M + RB/M R⊤
B/C(pT /C −pB/C).
(8)
On the other hand, if the arucoid corresponds to a col-
laborative ground robot, the probability values of the area
surrounding the robot are decreased (DiscountArea func-
tion). This update rule is based on the assumption that the
robots will not be close to each other.
After the map update, the BestWaypoint function retrieves
the waypoint corresponding to the cell of maximum proba-
bility:
arg max
(i, j)
pmap(i, j).
(9)
In the case of no ArUco markers identiﬁed in the images,
the DiscountCameraFovs function is employed. The dis-
counted cells depend on the camera which has produced the
observation. For the downward-looking camera, only the cell
occupied by the drone at update time is discounted. This
rule has been implemented considering that the resolution
of the map is approximately equal to the area covered by
the downward-looking camera ﬁeld of view with the drone
ﬂying at an altitude of about 1m. For the forward and ﬁxed
PTZ camera, ﬁrst, the direction of the camera in the map
frame is computed and approximated to the nearest 45 degree
angle. Then, in the computed direction, the cells on which a
robot could be correctly identiﬁed, if present, are discounted.
These cells range from a minimum value d−, determined by
the ﬁeld of view of the camera and the orientation of the
camera itself, and a maximum value d+, which corresponds
to the maximum distance at which an ArUco marker can be
detected (see Fig. 12).
In particular, d−is computed as:
d−= (pz + bz)/ tan(θcam + f ovv/2)
(10)
where θcam and f ovv are respectively the pitch angle with
respect to the horizontal plane and the vertical ﬁeld of view of
the considered camera. On the other hand, d+ is determined
experimentally.
123
Page 11 of 23
23
[p.12]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 12 Graphical
representation of high oblique
aerial ﬁeld of view
Also in this case, the BestWaypoint function is called for
computing the output waypoint after the map update.
During the tracking state, the decision-making module
keeps computing the robot position in the map frame accord-
ing to function Camera2Map. This phase ends when:
1. the robot has been lost, i.e., it is outside the ﬁeld of view
of the cameras. In this latter case, the tracking cannot
continue since no information about the position of the
ground robot can be obtained. Thus, the state machine
will resort to the probabilistic exploration phase in the
neighbourhood of the current position of the drone.
2. the robot is in the ﬁeld of view and a readable picture
of the reward string has been taken. In this case, the
operator will decide the landing sequence to follow in
order to maximize the reward considering the remaining
endurance of the drone and the probability of success of
each landing (this could be also computed through an
optimization process on the drone available hardware).
The output will be a sequence of waypoints in the initial
approximate world map of the considered landing pad.
Finally, if the robot is in the ﬁeld of view, but the reward
string is not readable, the state machine will remain in the
tracking phase.
4.3 Planning and Control
The planning and control module is meant for generating
collision-free paths and trajectories that should then be fol-
lowed by the UAV. For what concerns the planner, it takes
as inputs the waypoints p0
B/M generated by the high-level
decision making. An overview of the architecture is shown
in Fig. 13.
It is a common cascaded approach composed by a global
planner and a local planner. The global planner generates
a path from the current position of the drone to the given
waypoint. To this aim, it exploits the knowledge of the
world approximated map with a coarse resolution (1m). The
planner is a 2D implementation of Djikstra’s shortest path
algorithm. Successively, the generated path is pruned for
removing the collinear points. The remaining points are, one
at a time, used as goal into a local planner. The local plan-
ner, based on the A∗algorithm, is responsible for computing
a collision-free 3D path using the produced Octomap. With
respect to the planner used in the ﬁrst competition, the A∗
algorithm showed a remarkable improvement in the perfor-
mance: the possibility of having access to a global Octomap
and of planning online allows the planner to quickly ﬁnd the
shortest path, even in cluttered environments.
Algorithm 2 Local planner.
Input goal
Output path
1: while goal is not reached do
2:
obst = GetObstacles()
3:
if IsValid(path prev, obst) then
4:
path = path prev
5:
return path
6:
else
7:
if goal is in obst then
8:
while goal is not in obst do
9:
goal = PickRandTarget(goal)
10:
end while
11:
end if
12:
start = GetDronePos()
13:
path = ApplyAstar(goal, start, obst)
14:
if not path then
15:
ShrinkRadius()
16:
continue
17:
else
18:
return path
19:
end if
20:
end if
21:
path prev = path
22: end while
The planner pseudocode is presented in Algorithm 2.
The A∗algorithm, using the ApplyAstar function, com-
putes a path from the starting point, i.e., the drone current
position in the map reference frame (retrieved through the
GetDronePos function), to the next point of the global plan-
ner path. The most recent obstacles conﬁguration in the form
123
23
Page 12 of 23
[p.13]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 13 Planning architecture
of an Octomap, retrieved through the GetObstacles function,
is used by the planner. Note that a 3D implementation of
A∗is employed. It expands, for each node, the 26 contigu-
ous cells in the 3D space. At each planner execution, the
path is checked against newly emergent obstacles. It is worth
mentioning that collision checking is conducted inﬂating the
robot dimensions by a safety radius (IsValid function). If the
previously computed path is still valid, it is further processed
and sent to the drone controllers (as presented in the follow-
ing of this section). Otherwise, a re-planning procedure is
started. In addition to this, if the goal is one of the invalid
points, a new target point, in the neighbourhood of the pre-
vious one, is selected (PickRandTarget function). Finally, in
the case of difﬁculties in computing an admissible path, the
algorithm tries to decrease the safety radius up to a saturation
level through the ShrinkRadius function.
The resulting path from the local planner should be, then,
turned into a smooth trajectory, pt
B/O(t), before sending it
to the drone controller. This is done by computing the opti-
mal trajectory passing through the points belonging to the
local path, between the current drone position and the next
point in the global path. The starting and ending points of the
trajectory are constrained to be both in hover, i.e., with zero
velocity. Considering the drone as a simple point-mass sys-
tem, the time-optimal trajectory can be computed in closed
form, and its result is a bang-bang acceleration trajectory
[30]. We additionally impose a constraint on the maximum
velocity, resulting in a trapezoidal velocity proﬁle (refer to
[45] for trajectory equations). The dynamics of the system
is neglected since the system is limited in the attainable
velocities and acceleration by the perception pipeline con-
straints.However,forfurthertrajectorymodelspleasereferto
[19].
It is worth noting that the generated trajectory is written in
the map frame, while the UAV state estimate is in the odom
frame. Consequently, the trajectory is transformed into the
correct frame by exploiting the state of the localization ﬁlter
bO/M.
Note also that the yaw angle is commanded to have the
ﬁrst body axis, at each instant in time, oriented as the velocity
vector. This is done for coping with the possibility of newly
emergent obstacles during drone motion.
If during the execution of the trajectory the planner ﬁnds
that the related path is no longer valid, the drone stops in
its current position. Consequently, a collision-free path is
computed in the updated situation. Thus, the controller will
start tracking the newly produced trajectory.
Finally, the generated position set-points are sent to the
UAV FCU via mavros. The ﬂight controller is the one avail-
able in the PX4 ﬁrmware. A standard cascaded control
architecture, in which position and attitude controllers are
both P-PID, is implemented. For more details please refer to
[5].
For what concerns the landing procedure, an additional
controller is used. Once the landing pad position indicated on
the approximate world map has been reached, a visual feed-
back is employed. Refer to Fig. 14 for the block diagram of
the adopted landing procedure. The initial position setpoint
pt
B/O is modiﬁed with the output of a PI controller pcam.
This controller takes as input the error between the drone
positioning and the center of the marker, ecam, information
provided by the camera exploiting the ArUco tracker already
employed for navigation and decision making. Lastly, F(s),
which represents the complementary sensitivity of the posi-
tion control loop, will drive the drone to the desired position
pt
v. This control law is applied ﬁrst for alignment at the drone
123
Page 13 of 23
23
[p.14]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 14 Landing controller
architecture
ﬂight altitude and then tracking is also employed during
descent.
5 Simulation and Experimental Setup
For simulating the overall solution and to test the compatibil-
ity of the different modules and codes, the PX4 Software In
The Loop (SITL) simulation framework has been employed.
Gazebo5 has been selected as simulator, thanks to its easy and
efﬁcientinterfacewithROS.Thesimulateddroneisequipped
with all the sensors available in the real platform, namely a
downward-looking monocular camera, a range ﬁnder altime-
ter and a stereo camera for visual odometry computation and
mapping. On the simulator, other plugins have been inte-
grated for reproducing the moving ground robots and the
ﬁxed camera on the ﬁeld. All the phases of the competi-
tion have been simulated, a snapshot of which is available in
Fig. 15. The simulated environment is a reproduction of the
real competition ﬁeld in Fig. 1 and of the approximate world
map shown in Fig. 6.
For what concerns experimental tests, they are carried out
inside the Flying Arena for Rotorcraft Technologies (Fly-
ART) of Politecnico di Milano (Fig. 16).
FlyART is a 12m×6m×4m indoor facility equipped with
a Motion Capture system (Mocap) composed by 12 cam-
eras, which will be used as ground truth in the following.
A ground control station, connected to the same network of
the drone, is also used for receiving the images of the ground
robot and for sending the landing sequence to the drone. Four
ArUco landing pads have been placed at known positions
5 https://gazebosim.org/
in the facility. A moving ground robot has been employed
for performing experimental tests related to exploration and
tracking. Finally, some cardboard obstacles have been put in
place for testing both planning and mapping performance.
6 Results
In this section, ﬁrst the selection of the visual odometry algo-
rithm is discussed through results coming from a preliminary
test. Simulation results about a full competition mission are
then analyzed. Particular attention will be paid to some crit-
ical problems which arise on long duration ﬂights. Finally,
representative results obtained during a laboratory ﬂight test
campaign are shown.
6.1 Visual Odometry Comparison
An experiment was speciﬁcally conducted for comparing the
stereo visual odometry algorithms presented in Section 3. In
particular, the drone performs a circular trajectory at constant
altitude, while keeping ﬁxed yaw. The Euclidean norm of
the difference between the visual odometry estimate and the
ground truth position is taken as error metric. It is worth
noting that the image undistortion and stereo rectiﬁcation
are performed on the Jetson TX2 Graphics Processing Unit
(GPU) by the ZED SDK. The results are graphically shown
in Fig. 17.
The mean absolute and relative error with respect to the
travelled distance are reported in Table 1.
All the algorithms show good results in the proposed
experiment, with the best performance obtained by the ZED-
VO algorithm. Considering the available hardware, i.e.,
123
23
Page 14 of 23
[p.15]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 15 A snapshot from the
simulator
with GPU acceleration, this algorithm outperforms other
open-source algorithms with CPU implementations. Similar
results, using ground vehicles, can be also found in [22].
6.2 Simulation Results
The video of the complete simulation is available online6.
In simulation, particular attention has been spent for dealing
with aspects related to the localization. This because, due to
the reduced dimensions of the laboratory ﬂight test area com-
pared to the competition ﬁeld, simulation is the only way to
test factors coming into play in the long-run. In addition to
this, we focus on the z-axis, which has been highlighted as
one of the most critical factors in the performance of the UAV
in the ﬁrst competition. Consider Fig. 18, in which the results
of the localization are shown. The odometry has been delib-
erately simulated with high noise values in order to test the
localization robustness to drift. Nevertheless, the localization
is able to recover the "true" altitude, even rejecting measure-
ments corresponding to the presence of obstacles under the
drone. Note that the sum of the bias bO/M, state of the ﬁlter
presented in Section 4.1, and the position estimated by the
EKF2 pB/O is represented as the output of the localization
process.
As already mentioned in Section 3, the localization out-
put is used for retrieving the transformation between the map
and odom reference frames. This information is then used for
transforming the setpoints in the odom reference frame. The
result of this procedure is shown in Fig. 19. The setpoint
is clearly changing for compensating the drift of the altitude
estimate. The drone is, thus, able to keep the altitude constant,
6 Visit https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N7o6_CEzCn4
solving one of the problems which arose in the ﬁrst compe-
tition.
6.3 Experimental Results
The video of the experimental test is available online7. The
experiment can be split up in its main parts according to
the decision-making algorithm. After takeoff, the UAV con-
ducted an exploration phase of the laboratory environment,
looking for the intruder robot. After having found it with the
forward-looking camera, the tracking phase begun. The UAV
is driven towards the robot and it starts taking pictures of it.
After that, we can see the drone holding the position while we
were selecting the landing sequence from the ground control
station. Finally, the drone reached and landed on each of the
selected pads according to the given sequence.
For what concerns the navigation performance, the East
and North localization position components are shown in
Figs. 20 and 21 respectively. In these plots, the localization
is compared with the visual odometry output, which is in
turn affected by drift. In order to be in the same reference
frame of the localization position, the odometry curve has
been shifted by an offset, namely the drone initial position
in the map frame, which corresponds to the position of one
of the ArUco landing pads available in the laboratory. At the
same time, taking off from one of the ArUco markers, the
localization curve shows a sharp transient toward the value
of the ground truth.
For the Up direction, the altitude estimation results are
plotted in Fig. 22. The localization algorithm shows good
performance, even if the visual odometry already started a
remarkable drift in the short time frame of the experiment.
7 Visit https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lGsVxvEKR4A
123
Page 15 of 23
23
[p.16]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 16 The FlyART of Politecnico di Milano
In Fig. 23 we can see the Octomap, output of the RTAB-
Map SLAM algorithm, generated by the drone during the
mission. It resulted in a good representation of the laboratory
environment (see Fig. 23), in which the cardboard obstacles
and arena borders are indeed correctly mapped.
As far as the performance of the vision-based landing
are concerned, all the four landings can be considered valid
according to the competition rules. The ground truth path of
the drone during the experiment with the associated 4 land-
ings are shown in Fig. 24.
7 Technical Challenges and Future Works
During the solution development, many technical challenges
were faced. For example, the choice of the range ﬁnder (uti-
lized for altimeter purposes) was crucial. On the competition
ﬂoor, which was covered by a carpet, many commercial
solutions (Terabee Teraranger 3m, VL53L1X) showed some
limitations: they were either unable to return a measurement
or signiﬁcantly inaccurate, especially with the increase in the
ﬂight altitude. The selected Lidar-Lite v3, instead, has shown
remarkable accuracy and robustness to changes in ﬂight con-
ditions.
From the software point of view, the range ﬁnder mea-
surements’ rejection mechanism was a critical aspect in the
design of the solution. Clearly, the range ﬁnder measure-
ments were not fused directly in the EKF2 to avoid making
fast upward/downward moves when ﬂying over an obstacle.
The ﬁrst designed solution consisted of a ﬁnite-state
machine(FSM),whoseswitchinglogicwasbasedontherela-
tivedifferencebetweenconsecutivemeasurements.Knowing
the FSM’s state and the lowest obstacle’s height, the idea was
Fig. 17 Comparison among
stereo visual odometry
algorithms
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time [s]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
Error [m]
RTAB Map
ZED
ORB SLAM2
Viso2
123
23
Page 16 of 23
[p.17]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Table 1 Mean absolute and relative error of analyzed stereo visual
odometry algorithms
Algorithm
Mean error [m]
Relative error [%]
RTAB-Map
0.175
2.70
ZED-VO
0.078
1.21
LibViso2
0.244
3.77
ORB-SLAM2
0.184
2.84
to correct the ﬂight altitude, even during passages over obsta-
cles. However, this approach showed a strong sensitivity to
the quality of the measured altitude. For example, when ﬂy-
ing over an obstacle, the laser altimeter sometimes measured
a smooth transition instead of an abrupt change, as required
by the FSM.
To solve this problem, we started using a statistical out-
lier approach for rejecting the outliers, i.e., measurements
corresponding to the sensing of a building below the drone
(as presented in Section 4). The proposed procedure only
presents a limitation regarding the time spent hovering over
an obstacle. In fact, after rejecting many range measurements
with a consequent increase of the estimation error covariance
matrix components, a measurement could satisfy the NEES
check. If this condition is met, the estimated z-position com-
ponent would decrease, and the drone altitude would increase
accordingly.
In this context, note that the altimeter measurements and
thecorrespondingoutlierrejectionmechanismcanbeapplied
at the localization level (as we did in Section 4) or right before
fusing the stereo camera information with the IMU data in
the EKF2.
Despite the achievements of the second competition (for
competition results, refer to our previous paper [39]), some
criticalities were still present.
It is worth noting that, during the competition, outside the
ﬁeld, spectators could move around to see the experimental
platforms during the tasks execution. This aspect impacted
the accuracy of the visual odometry employed for state esti-
mation.
In addition to this, on one side of the ﬁeld, a uniform black
textureless wall was present. In that area, the lack of features
made the visual odometry output quality very low. Overall,
the ﬂight quality was greatly affected compared to the lab-
oratory environment. This problem was particularly evident
during landings, where inaccurate position estimation caused
some of them to be invalid in contrast to what was seen in
the laboratory (see Fig. 24).
The designed vision-based controller allows the drone to
align accurately with the underlying ArUCo marker, but dur-
ing the descent phase, the controller could not compensate for
the drone motion due to state estimation inaccuracies. The
performance is even worsened because the ArUCo marker
pose estimate gets interrupted when the marker leaves the
camera ﬁeld of view during drone descent.
Fig. 18 Comparison between
odometry and localization (Up
axis) in simulation
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Up [m]
Explore
Track
Landing sequence
Lidar altimeter
Odometry
Localization
Ground truth
Reject lidar meas
123
Page 17 of 23
23
[p.18]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 19 Setpoint (Up axis) sent
to the controller. Odometry and
ground truth also provided
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Up [m]
Explore
Track
Landing sequence
Setpoint
Odometry
Ground truth
Fig. 20 Comparison between
odometry and localization (East
axis)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
East [m]
Explore
Track
Landing sequence
Localization
Odometry
Ground truth
123
23
Page 18 of 23
[p.19]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 21 Comparison between
odometry and localization
(North axis)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
North [m]
Explore
Track
Landing sequence
Localization
Odometry
Ground truth
Fig. 22 Comparison between
odometry and localization (Up
axis). Added patches in which
the range ﬁnder measurements
are rejected
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Up [m]
Explore
Track
Landing sequence
Lidar altimeter
Odometry
Localization
Ground truth
Reject lidar meas
123
Page 19 of 23
23
[p.20]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
Fig. 23 Octomap obtained
during the experiment
Fig. 24 Ground truth path and
landings
123
23
Page 20 of 23
[p.21]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
In view of the third and last LDC competition, future
works could regard the improvement of visual odometry
performance, changing the stereo camera orientation to
a downward-looking conﬁguration. This change will help
solve the lack of features and the presence of moving people
and/or objects. On the other hand, the resulting architecture
will also need another camera for mapping and planning pur-
poses.
Alternatively, optical ﬂow sensors could also be tested for
improving state estimation. These sensors could complement
the forward-camera visual odometry in the aforementioned
situations. This solution has some signiﬁcant advantages:
optical ﬂow sensors are cheaper, lighter and require less
energy and computations with respect to a possible additional
stereo camera.
To reduce the impact of state estimation on the landing
accuracy, the control scheme of Fig. 14 could be re-designed
for sending velocity commands instead of position ones.
Moreover, additional work could be devoted to the plan-
ning module. This module can be simpliﬁed by removing
the global planner acting on the world approximated map
and by keeping the A∗computing the shortest collision-free
path from the drone current position to the end goal. This
change will increase the robustness of the system and the
generality of the solution.
Finally, an important aspect to be tackled is the reduc-
tion of the computational power employed. The solution
employed up to 90% of the available CPU. The software
which is mainly responsible for such a high load on the
processor is the ArUco tracker. It continuously searches for
markers, both landing pads and moving robots, over three dif-
ferent images from the downward-looking, forward-looking
andﬁxedPTZcameras.Apossiblesolutionregardsthedevel-
opment of a customized version of the tracker, replacing the
OpenCV implementation and possibly exploiting the avail-
able GPU resources.
8 Conclusions
In this paper, the solutions proposed by Politecnico di Milano
team at the ﬁrst two editions of the Leonardo Drone Con-
test are presented. First, the aim of the competitions, their
rules and objectives have been described. Successively, the
authors presented the two platforms speciﬁcally designed for
the contests, with particular focus on the equipped sensors
and software architectures. While for the ﬁrst edition the
focus was on the lessons learnt during the competition, the
solution developed for the second edition was discussed in
details. The modular architecture, comprising of navigation,
planning and decision-making modules was analyzed and
the performance obtained by the autonomous system were
assessed through both simulation and experimental activities
in a laboratory environment. Finally, some technical chal-
lengeswhicharoseduringthecompetitionandplannedfuture
activities were presented.
Acknowledgements Theauthorsthankthespin-offcompanyofPolitec-
nico di Milano ANT-X for the collaboration in the development of
the hardware platforms. The authors thank prof. Matteo Matteucci of
Politecnico di Milano for the help in the conceptualization of the solu-
tion.
Author Contributions All authors contributed to the research, develop-
ment, and testing of the proposed systems. Gabriele Roggi is the author
of the proposed software architectures and contributed to the devel-
opment of the hardware platforms. Salvatore Meraglia contributed to
the preliminary design of the solution and to the experimental activi-
ties. Marco Lovera is the head of the Aerospace Systems and Control
Laboratory of Politecnico di Milano, and he provided us with the nec-
essary guidance, funding and ﬁnal proofreading. The ﬁrst draft of the
manuscript was written by Gabriele Roggi, and all authors commented
on previous versions of the submitted manuscript.
Funding OpenaccessfundingprovidedbyPolitecnicodi Milanowithin
the CRUI-CARE Agreement. The authors declare that no funds, grants,
or other support were received during the preparation of this manuscript.
Data Availability The manuscript has no associated data.
Declarations
Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate All applicable institutional
and national guidelines were followed.
Consent for Publication Informed consent was obtained from all the
co-authors of this publication.
Competing Interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-
cate if changes were made. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectlyfromthecopy-
right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Alphapilot
AI
Drone
Innovation
Challenge.
https://www.
lockheedmartin.com/en-us/news/events/ai-innovation-challenge.
html. Accessed 28 June 2022
2. ANT-X website. https://antx.it/. Accessed 28 June 2022
3. Leonardo Drone Contest autonomous drone competition. https://
www.leonardo.com/it/innovation-technology/open-innovation/
drone-contest. Accessed 17 Jan 2022
123
Page 21 of 23
23
[p.22]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
4. Mohamed
Bin
Zayed
International
Robotics
Challenge
(MBZIRC). https://www.mbzirc.com/. Accessed 17 Jan 2022
5. PX4 documentation. https://docs.px4.io/v1.12/en/. Accessed 06
May 2022
6. Achtelik, M., Bachrach, A., He, R., Prentice, S., Roy, N.: Stereo
vision and laser odometry for autonomous helicopters in GPS-
denied indoor environments. Unmanned Systems Technology XI
7332, 733219 (2009)
7. Basilico, N.: Recent trends in robotic patrolling. Current Robotics
Reports pp. 1–12 (2022)
8. Beul, M., Bultmann, S., Rochow, A., Rosu, R.A., Schleich, D.,
Splietker, M., Behnke, S.: Visually guided balloon popping with
an autonomous MAV at MBZIRC 2020. IEEE International Sym-
posiumonSafety,Security,andRescueRobotics(SSRR)pp.34–41
(2020)
9. Bircher, A., Kamel, M., Alexis, K., Oleynikova, H., Siegwart,
R.: Receding horizon "next-best-view" planner for 3D explo-
ration.IEEE International Conference onRoboticsandAutomation
(ICRA) pp. 1462–1468 (2016)
10. Blösch, M., Weiss, S., Scaramuzza, D., Siegwart, R.: Vision based
MAV navigation in unknown and unstructured environments. 2010
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
pp. 21–28 (2010)
11. De Wagter, C., Paredes-Vallés, F., Sheth, N., de Croon, G.: The arti-
ﬁcial intelligence behind the winning entry to the 2019 AI robotic
racing competition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.14985 (2021)
12. De Wagter, C., Paredes-Vallés, F., Sheth, N., de Croon, G.: Learn-
ing fast in autonomous drone racing. Nature Machine Intelligence
3(10), 923–923 (2021)
13. Dias, J., Althoefer, K., Lima, P.U.: Robot competitions: What did
we learn? IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 23(1), 16–18
(2016)
14. Doitsidis, L., Weiss, S., Renzaglia, A., Achtelik, M., Kosmatopou-
los, E., Siegwart, R., Scaramuzza, D.: Optimal surveillance
coverage for teams of micro aerial vehicles in GPS-denied envi-
ronments using onboard vision. Autonomous Robots 33, 173–188
(2012)
15. Engel, J., Sturm, J., Cremers, D.: Accurate ﬁgure ﬂying with
a quadrocopter using onboard visual and inertial sensing. Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Visual Control of Mobile Robots
(ViCoMoR) at the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems (IROS) (2012)
16. Engel, J., Sturm, J., Cremers, D.: Scale-aware navigation of a
low-cost quadrocopter with a monocular camera. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems 62(11), 1646–1656 (2014)
17. Faessler, M., Fontana, F., Forster, C., Mueggler, E., Pizzoli, M.,
Scaramuzza, D.: Autonomous, vision-based ﬂight and live dense
3D mapping with a quadrotor micro aerial vehicle. J. Field Rob.
33(4), 431–450 (2016)
18. Foehn, P., Brescianini, D., Kaufmann, E., Cieslewski, T., Gehrig,
M., Muglikar, M., Scaramuzza, D.: Alphapilot: Autonomous drone
racing. Autonomous Robots pp. 1–14 (2021)
19. Foehn, P., Romero, A., Scaramuzza, D.: Time-optimal planning
for quadrotor waypoint ﬂight. Science Robotics 6(56), eabh1221
(2021)
20. Forster, C., Zhang, Z., Gassner, M., Werlberger, M., Scaramuzza,
D.: SVO: Semidirect visual odometry for monocular and multi-
camera systems. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 33(2), 249–265
(2016)
21. Geiger, A., Ziegler, J., Stiller, C.: Stereoscan: Dense 3D recon-
struction in real-time. IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV)
pp. 963–968 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/IVS.2011.5940405
22. Giubilato, R., Chiodini, S., Pertile, M., Debei, S.: An evalu-
ation of ROS-compatible stereo visual SLAM methods on a
nVidia Jetson TX2. Measurement (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.measurement.2019.03.038
23. González-Banos, H.: A randomized art-gallery algorithm for sen-
sor placement. Proceedings of the seventeenth annual symposium
on Computational geometry pp. 232–240 (2001)
24. Hong, W., Zhou, C., Tian, Y.: Robust Monte Carlo Localization
for humanoid soccer robot. IEEE/ASME International Conference
on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics pp. 934–939 (2009). https://
doi.org/10.1109/AIM.2009.5229889
25. Hornung, A., Wurm, K.M., Bennewitz, M., Stachniss, C., Burgard,
W.: OctoMap: An efﬁcient probabilistic 3D mapping framework
based on octrees. Autonomous Robots (2013)
26. Hoshino, S., Ishiwata, T., Ueda, R.: Optimal patrolling method-
ology of mobile robot for unknown visitors. Advanced Robotics
30(16), 1072–1085 (2016)
27. Hoshino, S., Ugajin, S., Ishiwata, T.: Patrolling robot based on
bayesian learning for multiple intruders. IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) pp. 603–
609 (2015)
28. Labbé, M., Michaud, F.: Appearance-based loop closure detection
for online large-scale and long-term operation. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics 29(3), 734–745 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.
2013.2242375
29. Labbé, M., Michaud, F.: RTAB-Map as an open-source lidar and
visual simultaneous localization and mapping library for large-
scale and long-term online operation. Journal of Field Robotics
36(2), 416–446 (2019)
30. LaValle, S.M.: Planning algorithms. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, U.K. (2006)
31. Lenz, C., Schwarz, M., Rochow, A., Razlaw, J., Periyasamy, A.S.,
Schreiber, M., Behnke, S.: Autonomous wall building with a UGV-
UAV team at MBZIRC 2020. IEEE International Symposium on
Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR) pp. 189–196 (2020)
32. Mohta, K., Watterson, M., Mulgaonkar, Y., Liu, S., Qu, C., Maki-
neni, A., Saulnier, K., Sun, K., Zhu, A., Delmerico, J., et al.: Fast,
autonomousﬂight inGPS-deniedandclutteredenvironments.Jour-
nal of Field Robotics 35(1), 101–120 (2018)
33. Moon, H., Martínez-Carranza, J., Cieslewski, T., Faessler, M.,
Falanga,D.,Simovic,A.,Scaramuzza,D.,Li,S.,Ozo,M.M.O.I.,de
Wagter, C., de Croon, G.C., Hwang, S., Jung, S., Shim, H., Kim,
H., Park, M., Au, T.C., Kim, S.J.: Challenges and implemented
technologies used in autonomous drone racing. Intelligent Service
Robotics 12, 137–148 (2019)
34. Mur-Artal, R., Montiel, J.M.M., Tardos, J.D.: ORB-SLAM: a ver-
satile and accurate monocular slam system. IEEE Transactions on
Robotics 31(5), 1147–1163 (2015)
35. Nikolic, J., Burri, M., Rehder, J., Leutenegger, S., Huerzeler, C.,
Siegwart, R.: A UAV system for inspection of industrial facilities.
2013 IEEE Aerospace Conference pp. 1–8 (2013)
36. Oleynikova, H., Burri, M., Taylor, Z., Nieto, J., Siegwart, R.,
Galceran, E.: Continuous-time trajectory optimization for online
UAV replanning. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems (IROS) pp. 5332–5339 (2016). https://
doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2016.7759784
37. Oleynikova, H., Lanegger, C., Taylor, Z., Pantic, M., Millane, A.,
Siegwart, R., Nieto, J.: An open-source system for vision-based
micro-aerialvehiclemapping,planning,andﬂightinclutteredenvi-
ronments. Journal of Field Robotics 37(4), 642–666 (2020)
38. Rezende, A., Miranda, V.R., Rezeck, P.A., Azpúrua, H., San-
tos, E.R., Gonçalves, V.M., Macharet, D.G., Freitas, G.M.: An
integrated solution for an autonomous drone racing in indoor envi-
ronments. Intel. Serv. 14(5), 641–661 (2021)
39. Roggi,G.,Meraglia,S.,Lovera,M.:LeonardoDroneContest2021:
Politecnico di Milano team architecture. International Conference
on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS) pp. 191–196 (2022)
40. Sampedro,C.,Bavle,H.,Rodríguez-Ramos,A.,Carrio,A.,Fernán-
dez, R.A.S., Sanchez-Lopez, J.L., Campoy, P.: A fully-autonomous
aerial robotic solution for the 2016 international micro air vehicle
123
23
Page 22 of 23
[p.23]
Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems (2023) 108:23
competition. 2017 International conference on unmanned aircraft
systems (ICUAS) pp. 989–998 (2017)
41. Santamaria-Navarro,A.,Loianno,G.,Solà,J.,Kumar,V.,Andrade-
Cetto, J.: Autonomous navigation of micro aerial vehicles using
high-rate and low-cost sensors. Autonomous Robots 42(6), 1263–
1280 (2018)
42. Scaramuzza, D., Achtelik, M., Doitsidis, L., Friedrich, F.,
Kosmatopoulos, E., Martinelli, A., Achtelik, M., Chli, M.,
Chatzichristoﬁs, S., Kneip, L., et al.: Vision-controlled micro ﬂying
robots: from system design to autonomous navigation and mapping
in GPS-denied environments. IEEE Robotics & Automation Mag-
azine 21(3), 26–40 (2014)
43. Schedl, D.C., Kurmi, I., Bimber, O.: An autonomous drone for
search and rescue in forests using airborne optical sectioning. Sci-
ence Robotics 6(55) (2021)
44. Schmid, K., Lutz, P., Tomi´c, T., Mair, E., Hirschmüller, H.:
Autonomous vision-based micro air vehicle for indoor and out-
door navigation. Journal of Field Robotics 31(4), 537–570 (2014)
45. Sciavicco, L., Siciliano, B.: Modelling and control of robot manip-
ulators. Springer Science & Business Media, Heidelberg (2001)
46. Semsch,
E.,
Jakob,
M.,
Pavlicek,
D.,
Pechoucek,
M.:
Autonomous UAV surveillance in complex urban environ-
ments. IEEE/WIC/ACM International Joint Conference on Web
Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology 2, 82–85 (2009)
47. Sousa, A., Costa, P., Moreira, A., Carvalho, A.: Self localization
of an autonomous robot: using an EKF to merge odometry and
vision based landmarks. IEEE Conference on Emerging Technolo-
gies and Factory Automation 1, 7–233 (2005). https://doi.org/10.
1109/ETFA.2005.1612524
48. Stronger, D., Stone, P.: A comparison of two approaches for vision
and self-localization on a mobile robot. IEEE International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation pp. 3915–3920 (2007). https://
doi.org/10.1109/ROBOT.2007.364079
49. Ulrich, I., Borenstein, J.: VFH*: Local obstacle avoidance
with look-ahead veriﬁcation. IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA) 3, 2505–2511 (2000)
50. Vanneste, S., Bellekens, B., Weyn, M.: 3DVFH+: Real-time three-
dimensional obstacle avoidance using an octomap. Proceedings of
the 1st International Workshop on Model-Driven Robot Software
Engineering (1319), 91–102 (2014)
51. Vrba, M., Stasinchuk, Y., Báˇca, T., Spurn`y, V., Petrlík, M., Heˇrt,
D., Žaitlík, D., Saska, M.: Autonomous capture of agile ﬂying
objects using UAVs: The MBZIRC 2020 challenge. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems 149, 103970 (2022)
52. Walter, V., Spurný, V., Petrlík, M., Báˇca, T., Žaitlík, D., Saska, M.:
Extinguishing of ground ﬁres by fully autonomous UAVs moti-
vated by the MBZIRC 2020 competition. International Conference
on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS) pp. 787–793 (2021).
10.1109/ICUAS51884.2021.9476723
53. Zhou, B., Gao, F., Wang, L., Liu, C., Shen, S.: Robust and efﬁcient
quadrotor trajectory generation for fast autonomous ﬂight. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters 4(4), 3529–3536 (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2019.2927938
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Gabriele Roggi graduated in Aeronautical Engineering from Politec-
nico di Milano, Milano, Italy, in 2019, and received the Ph.D. degree
in Aerospace Engineering from Politecnico di Milano in 2023. He is
currently Research Fellow with the Dipartimento di Scienze e Tec-
nologie Aerospaziali, Politecnico di Milano. His research activity
involves the design, implementation and experimental validation of
guidance, navigation and control algorithms for multirotor UAVs.
Salvatore Meraglia graduated in Space Engineering from Politecnico
di Milano, Milano, Italy, in 2019, and received the Ph.D. degree in
Aerospace Engineering from Politecnico di Milano in 2023. He is cur-
rently Research Fellow with the Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie
Aerospaziali, Politecnico di Milano. His research encompasses control
theoretic investigations and experimental validation of a wide variety
of aerospace systems, including space vehicles and multirotor UAVs.
Marco Lovera received the M.Sc. in Electronics Engineering at Politec-
nico di Milano, Milano, Italy, 1993 and the Ph.D. degree in Computer
Science and Control Engineering at Politecnico di Milano, Milano,
Italy, 1998. After a one-year period in industry he joined the Dipar-
timento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di
Milano, in 1999. Since 2015, he is with the Dipartimento di Scienze e
Tecnologie Aerospaziali of the Politecnico di Milano, where he leads
the Aerospace Systems and Control Laboratory (ASCL).
123
Page 23 of 23
23
=== END ===
