warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1190.pdf
sha256: AB01CF0B714AC00903110EDCE66AEE75331A6A57217FFDCA6CCEDD978C94B601
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 30
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Aerospace Science and Technology
www.elsevier.com/locate/aescte
Reduction of GNSS-Denied inertial navigation errors for ﬁxed wing 
autonomous unmanned air vehicles
Eduardo Gallo ∗,1, Antonio Barrientos
Centro de Automática y Robótica, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid - Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas
a r t i c l e 
i n f o
a b s t r a c t
Article history:
Received 11 August 2021
Received in revised form 27 October 2021
Accepted 23 November 2021
Available online 26 November 2021
Communicated by Euan Mcgookin
Keywords:
GNSS-Denied
GPS-Denied
Inertial navigation
Autonomous navigation
UAV
VIO
This article proposes an inertial navigation algorithm intended to lower the negative consequences of 
the absence of GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite System) signals on the navigation of autonomous ﬁxed 
wing low SWaP (Size, Weight, and Power) UAVs (Unmanned Air Vehicles). In addition to accelerometers 
and gyroscopes, the ﬁlter takes advantage of sensors usually present onboard these platforms, such as 
magnetometers, Pitot tube, and air vanes, and aims to reduce the attitude error and position drift (both 
horizontal and vertical) with the dual objective of improving the aircraft GNSS-Denied inertial navigation 
capabilities as well as facilitating the fusion of the inertial ﬁlter with visual odometry algorithms. 
Stochastic high ﬁdelity Monte Carlo simulations of two representative scenarios involving the loss of
GNSS signals are employed to evaluate the results, compare the proposed ﬁlter with more traditional 
implementations, and analyze the sensitivity of the results to the quality of the onboard sensors. The 
author releases the C++ implementation of both the navigation ﬁlter and the high ﬁdelity simulation as 
open-source software [1].
© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Mathematical notation
Any variable with a hat accent < ˆ· > refers to its estimated 
value, with a tilde <· > to its measured value, and with a dot 
< ˙· > to its time derivative. In the case of vectors, which are dis-
played in bold (e.g., x), other employed symbols include the wide 
hat <· >, which refers to the skew-symmetric form, and the dou-
ble vertical bars < ∥· ∥>, which refer to the norm. In the case of 
scalars, the vertical bars < | · | > refer to the absolute value. When 
employing quaternions, which are also displayed in bold (e.g., q), 
the asterisk superindex < ·∗> refers to the conjugate, the quater-
nion multiplication is represented by ⊗, and ⊖refers to the minus 
operator.
Four different reference frames are used in this article: the in-
ertial frame (FI), the ECEF frame (FE), the NED frame (FN), and the 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: edugallo@yahoo.com, e.gallo@alumnos.upm.es (E. Gallo), 
antonio.barrientos@upm.es (A. Barrientos).
1 Postal address: Centro de Automática y Robótica (CAR UPM-CSIC), c/ José Gutiér-
rez Abascal 2, 28006, Madrid, Spain.
body frame (FB). Superindexes are employed over vectors to spec-
ify the reference frame in which they are viewed (e.g., vN refers 
to ground velocity viewed in FN, while vB is the same vector but 
viewed in FB). Subindexes may be employed to clarify the mean-
ing of the variable or vector, such as in vTAS for air velocity instead 
of the ground velocity v, in which case the subindex is either an 
acronym or its meaning is clearly explained when ﬁrst introduced. 
Subindexes may also refer to a given component of a vector, e.g. vN
2
refers to the second component of vN. In addition, where two ref-
erence frames appear as subindexes to a vector, it means that the 
vector goes from the ﬁrst frame to the second. For example, ωB
NB
refers to the angular velocity from the FN frame to the FB frame 
viewed in FB. In addition, there exist two indexes that appear as 
subindexes: j identiﬁes an speciﬁc run within each Monte Carlo 
simulation, while n identiﬁes a discrete time instant tn.
1. Introduction and outline
The extreme dependency of an autonomous UAV (Unmanned 
Air Vehicle) inertial navigation to the presence of GNSS (Global 
Navigation Satellite System) signals, without which it incurs in a 
slow but unavoidable position drift that may ultimately lead to the 
loss of the platform, is discussed in section 2. This dependency 
does not only constitute a signiﬁcant obstacle for the widespread 
usage of these platforms in civil airspace, but also represents a 
threat to military missions.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2021.107237
1270-9638/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
[p.2]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Nomenclature
α
Angle of attack
α
Angular acceleration
β
Angle of sideslip
βT
ISA temperature gradient
γTAS
Aerodynamic path angle
δCNTR
Position of throttle and control surfaces
δTARGET
Control targets

Estimation error, increment
p
Atmospheric pressure offset
r
Rotation perturbation or error
t
Estimation or sensing period
T
Atmospheric temperature offset
θ
Body pitch angle
μ
Mean or expected value
ξ
Body bank angle
σ
Standard deviation
σu
Sensor bias drift
σv
Sensor system noise
ϒ
Execution or run
ϕ
Latitude
χ
Bearing
ψ
Heading or body yaw angle
ω
Angular velocity
ωE
WGS84 ellipsoid angular velocity
a
Acceleration
ac
Centrifugal acceleration
acor
Coriolis acceleration
atrs
Transport acceleration
B
Magnetic ﬁeld
B0
Sensor bias offset
E
Full sensor error
f
Speciﬁc force
F
Force
FAER
Aerodynamic forces
FPRO
Propulsive forces
g
Gravitation acceleration
g0
Standard acceleration of free fall
gc
Gravity acceleration
h
Geometric altitude
H
Geopotential altitude
HP
Pressure altitude
m
Sensor cross coupling
N
Radius of curvature of prime vertical
p
Atmospheric pressure
p
Container vector
p0
Standard mean sea level pressure
q
Unit quaternion
R
Air speciﬁc constant
R
Rotation matrix
RE
Earth radius
s
Sensor scale factor
t
Time
T
Atmospheric temperature
T0
Standard mean sea level temperature
v
Speed
v
Velocity
x
Horizontal distance
x
Position
xAIR
Air data ﬁlter state vector
xATT
Attitude ﬁlter state vector
xPOS
Position ﬁlter state vector
ˆx = xEST
Estimated trajectory
xGDT
Geodetic coordinates
xREF
Reference objectives
x = xSENSED
Sensed trajectory
x = xTRUTH
Real trajectory
yAIR
Air data ﬁlter observation vector
yATT
Attitude ﬁlter observation vector
yPOS
Position ﬁlter observation vector
Acronyms
ACC
ACCelerometers
MX
MiX
AOA
Angle Of Attack
NDB
Non Directional Beacon
AOS
Angle Of Sideslip
NED
North East Down
BRIEF
Binary Robust Independent Elementary
NSE
Navigation System Error
Features
OAT
Outside Air Temperature
DSO
Direct Sparse Odometry
ORB
Oriented FAST and rotated BRIEF
ECEF
Earth Centered Earth Fixed
OSP
Outside Static Pressure
EKF
Extended Kalman Filter
SAR
Synthetic Aperture Radar
FAST
Features from Accelerated Segment Test
SLAM
Simultaneous Localization And Mapping
FTE
Flight Technical Error
SoOP
Signals of OPportunity
GNSS
Global Navigation Satellite System
STOL
Short Take Off and Landing
GPS
Global Positioning System
SVO
Semi direct Visual Odometry
GYR
GYRoscopes
SWaP
Size, Weight, and Power
ICAO
International Civil Aviation Organization
TAS
True Air Speed
ILS
Instrument Landing System
TPS
Theater Positioning System
IMU
Inertial Measurement Unit
TSE
Total System Error
INS
Inertial Navigation System
UAV
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
INSA
ICAO Non Standard Atmosphere
VHF
Very High Frequency
ISA
ICAO Standard Atmosphere
VIO
Visual Inertial Odometry
LIDAR
LIght Detection And Ranging
VO
Visual Odometry
LSD
Large scale Semi Direct
VOR
VHF Omnidirectional Radio Range
MAG
MAGnetometers
VTOL
Vertical Take Off and Landing
MEMS
Micro Machined Electromechanical
WGS84
World Geodetic System 1984
System
This article focuses on autonomous ﬁxed wing low SWaP (Size, 
Weight, and Power) aircraft, and proposes an inertial navigation ﬁl-
ter speciﬁcally designed for GNSS-Denied conditions. The proposed 
ﬁlter takes advantage of sensors usually present onboard ﬁxed 
wing aircraft but only used for control purposes instead of navi-
gation, the particularities of ﬁxed wing ﬂight, and the atmospheric 
and wind estimations that can be obtained before the GNSS sig-
nals are lost. The ﬁlter does not only diminish the GNSS-Denied 
2
[p.3]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
position drift so the vehicle has a higher probability of returning 
to base, but it also improves the GNSS-Denied estimation of the 
aircraft attitude, specially during maneuvers, with the aim of facil-
itating the addition of cameras and visual odometry algorithms to 
the navigation system, which constitutes one of the most promis-
ing approaches to further reduce the position drift. The objectives 
and novelty of the proposed ﬁlter are described in section 3 in the 
context of the different existing approaches to GNSS-Denied navi-
gation.
Section 4 introduces the stochastic high ﬁdelity simulation em-
ployed to evaluate the navigation results by means of Monte Carlo 
executions of two scenarios representative of the challenges of
GNSS-Denied navigation, which are described in detail in [2]. Its 
reading is highly recommended in order to understand the rest of 
this article, as is that of [3], which describes the different error 
sources modeled for each of the onboard sensors.
Section 5 describes the proposed inertial navigation system 
(INS), characterized by its separation into three different extended 
Kalman ﬁlters (EKFs), an implementation of the speciﬁc force ob-
servation equation that reduces the negative effects of the lack of 
position and ground velocity GNSS measurements, and the freez-
ing of the wind ﬁeld and atmospheric pressure offset estimations 
at the time the GNSS signals are lost.
A detailed analysis of the ability of the proposed INS ﬁlter to 
track the aircraft attitude, its ground velocity, as well as its ver-
tical and horizontal positions, is presented in section 6. They are 
compared in section 7 with the results obtained based on more 
traditional approaches employed to estimate the aircraft pose (at-
titude plus position), representative of systems designed to work 
with GNSS signals but that can no longer rely on them.
The analysis of the results concludes in section 8, which dis-
cusses the inﬂuence of the quality or grade of the different sensors 
on the aircraft GNSS-Denied inertial navigation capabilities. By en-
suring that the results obtained when employing sensors of infe-
rior quality are qualitatively the same and quantitatively slightly 
inferior to those presented in section 6, the beneﬁts of the pro-
posed INS are safeguarded from possible errors introduced when 
modeling the performances of the various sensors. Last, the results 
are summarized for convenience in section 9, while section 10 pro-
vides a short conclusion.
2. GNSS-Denied navigation
An autonomous UAV relies on onboard computers to execute 
the previously uploaded mission objectives. It can employ the 
communications channel to provide information to the ground, 
which may decide to update the mission and upload it to the 
platform, but as its own name implies, it can also operate with-
out any kind of communication with its operator. It just continues 
executing its mission until the ﬂight concludes or the mission is 
modiﬁed.
The number, variety, and applications of UAVs have grown ex-
ponentially in the last few years, and the trend is expected to 
continue in the future [4]. This is particularly true in the case of 
low SWaP vehicles because their reduced cost makes them suit-
able for a wide range of applications, both civil and military. A 
signiﬁcant percentage of these vehicles are capable of operating 
autonomously. With small variations, these platforms rely on a 
suite of sensors that continuously provides noisy data about the 
airframe state, a navigation algorithm to estimate the aircraft pose, 
and a control system that, based on the navigation outputs, ad-
justs the aircraft control mechanisms to successfully execute the 
preloaded mission.
This article focuses on ﬁxed wing autonomous platforms, which 
are generally equipped with a GNSS receiver, accelerometers, gy-
roscopes, magnetometers, a Pitot tube, and air vanes. The com-
bination of accelerometers and gyroscopes is known as the Iner-
tial Measurement Unit (IMU). The errors introduced by all sensors 
grow signiﬁcantly as their SWaP decreases, in particular in the 
case of the IMU. The recent introduction of solid state accelerom-
eters and gyroscopes has dramatically improved the performance 
of low SWaP IMUs, with new models showing signiﬁcant improve-
ments when compared to those manufactured only a few years 
ago. The problem of noisy measurement readings is compounded 
in the case of low SWaP vehicles by the low mass of the plat-
forms, which results in less inertia and hence more high frequency 
accelerations and rotations caused by the atmospheric turbulence. 
[5] presents a comprehensive review of low SWaP UAV navigation 
systems and the problems they face, including the degradation or 
absence of GNSS signals.
Aircraft navigation has traditionally relied on the measurements 
provided by accelerometers, gyroscopes, and magnetometers, in-
curring in an slow but unbounded position drift that could only 
be stopped by triangulation with the use of external navigation 
(radio) aids. More recently, the introduction of satellite navigation 
(GNSS) has completely removed the position drift and enabled au-
tonomous inertial navigation in low SWaP platforms [6–8]. On the 
negative side, low SWaP inertial navigation exhibits an extreme 
dependency on the availability of GNSS signals. If the signals are 
not present or can not be employed, inertial systems rely on dead 
reckoning, which results in velocity and position drift, with the air-
craft slowly but steadily deviating from its intended route [9].
The availability of GNSS signals cannot be guaranteed by any 
means. In addition to the (unlikely) event of one or various GNSS
satellites ceasing to broadcast (voluntarily or not), the GNSS sig-
nals can be accidentally blocked by nearby objects (mountains, 
buildings, trees), corrupted by their own reﬂections in those same 
objects, or maliciously interfered with by broadcasting a different 
signal in the same frequency (jamming or spooﬁng). A through-
out analysis of GNSS threats and reasons for signal degradation 
is presented in [10]. Any of the above results in what is known 
as GNSS-Denied navigation. In that event, the vehicle is unable to 
ﬂy its intended route or even return to a safe recovery location, 
which leads to the uncontrolled loss of the airframe if the GNSS
signals are not recovered before the aircraft runs out of fuel (or 
battery in case of electric vehicles). Although there exist various
GNSS threat monitoring and reporting systems [11], autonomous 
aircraft need to continuously evaluate the quality of the available 
signals autonomously to decide if they can rely on them or not. 
[12] proposes a continuous evaluation of GNSS accuracy based on 
its integration within the INS.
Note that although the term GNSS-Denied is more generic and 
implies the absence of valid signals from any navigation satellite 
system, GPS-Denied is more commonly employed in the litera-
ture, particularly in non scientiﬁc circles. Both terms are analogous 
in the context of navigation, as GPS-Denied does not imply the 
availability of navigation signals from non GPS satellite navigation 
systems; the widespread use of the term GPS-Denied can be at-
tributed to GPS being the ﬁrst widely available global navigation 
satellite system and, at least until recently, the system on which 
most GNSS receivers relied. This article however employs the term
GNSS-Denied, which is considered more adequate and technically 
correct, representing the absence of navigation signals from any
GNSS, GPS included.
The extreme dependency on GNSS availability is not only one 
of the main impediments for the introduction of small UAVs in 
civil airspace, where it is not acceptable to have uncontrolled ve-
hicles causing personal or material damage, but it also presents 
a signiﬁcant drawback for military applications, as a single hull 
loss may compromise the onboard technology. At this time there 
are no comprehensive solutions to the operation of low SWaP au-
tonomous UAVs in GNSS-Denied scenarios, although the use of on-
3
[p.4]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
board cameras to provide an additional relative pose measurement 
seems to be one of the most promising routes. Bigger and more 
expensive UAVs, this is, with less stringent SWaP requirements, 
can rely to some degree on more accurate IMUs (at the expense 
of SWaP) and additional communications equipment to overcome 
this problem, but for most autonomous UAVs, the permanent loss 
of the GNSS signals is equivalent to losing the airframe in an un-
controlled way.
3. Objective, novelty, and application
Objective
The main objective of this article is to improve the GNSS-
Denied navigation capabilities of autonomous ﬁxed wing low SWaP
vehicles, so in case GNSS signals become unavailable, they can 
continue their mission or safely ﬂy to a predetermined recovery 
location. By reducing the attitude and vertical position inertial es-
timation errors, as well as the horizontal position drift inherent to
GNSS-Denied inertial navigation, the proposed inertial algorithms 
can be more easily fused with visual odometry techniques to pro-
vide a viable solution. Three remarks should be added to this ob-
jective:
• The focus on low SWaP autonomous UAVs rules out the use 
of high quality sensors, which in general are bigger and have 
more weight, heavier platforms with more inertia against at-
mospheric turbulence, as well as the assistance of any kind 
of communications between the platform and the ground. Al-
though the proposed algorithms would work if installed on-
board higher SWaP platforms, there may exist better solutions 
for high SWaP GNSS-Denied navigation that take advantage of 
the better quality of the onboard sensors as well as the higher 
platform inertia against turbulence.
• Platforms that generate their lift by means of rotating blades 
(helicopters and multirotors) are excluded as the proposed
INS takes advantage of the special characteristics of ﬁxed 
wing ﬂight, as explained below. VTOL (Vertical Take Off and 
Landing) as well as STOL (Short Take Off and Landing) plat-
forms, which use their rotors to generate lift when the air-
speed is low, but are capable of rotating them to ﬂy like con-
ventional ﬁxed wing aircraft, can rely on the proposed INS
only when behaving like ﬁxed wing platforms.
• Although the modeled platform employs a piston engine to 
power the propeller, there would be no signiﬁcant difference 
in the results if it were replaced by an electric motor.
Possible approaches to GNSS-Denied navigation
Inertial navigation employs the periodic readings provided by 
triads of accelerometers and gyroscopes (known as inertial sen-
sors) to estimate the pose of a moving object by means of dead 
reckoning or integration. On aircraft, inertial sensors are comple-
mented by magnetometers and a barometer to add robustness to 
the inertial solution. Fixed wing aircraft are also equipped with a 
Pitot tube and air vanes required by their control system, although 
their measurements are usually not employed for navigation. Abso-
lute references such as those provided by navigation radio aids2 or
GNSS receivers are required to remove the position drift inherent 
to inertial navigation.
Low SWaP autonomous aircraft are too small to incorporate 
navigation aid receivers, which in any case are not available over 
vast regions of the Earth, exhibiting an extreme dependency on the 
2 The most widely used radio aids for aircraft navigation are VHF Omnidirectional 
Radio Range (VOR), Non Directional Beacon (NDB), and Instrument Landing System 
(ILS).
availability of GNSS signals. A summary of the challenges of GNSS-
Denied navigation and the research efforts intended to improve its 
performance is provided by [13].
One approach to mitigate this problem is the establishment of 
alternative navigation signals, such as the ground-wave radio fre-
quency location signals of the Theater Positioning System (TPS) for 
military applications [14–16], or the use of pseudo satellites gen-
erating GNSS-like signals from ﬁxed ground locations [17–20], also 
known as pseudolites.
An alternative approach is to triangulate the aircraft position 
using existing signals originally intended for other purposes, such 
as those of television and cellular networks [21–24]. Receivers 
for these signals, known as Signals of Opportunity (SoOP), have a 
suﬃciently low SWaP to be mounted on most autonomous air-
craft, although the quality and quantity of the available signals 
varies enormously depending on the location where the ﬂight 
takes place.
Georegistration
matches landmarks or terrain features as
scanned or imaged by vehicles to preloaded data [13], and can 
work based on Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) [25–27], Light De-
tection and Ranging (LIDAR) [28–30], or camera visual systems, 
in what is known as image registration [31–34]. While SAR suffers 
from being memory and computationally expensive and LIDAR is 
restricted for aviation purposes by its limited range, image regis-
tration is a potentially valid solution for completely removing the 
position drift in GNSS-Denied scenarios. Its main challenge is ob-
taining a high percentage of positive matches when supplied with 
onboard generated images that display the terrain not only at dif-
ferent altitudes and attitudes than those of the database images, 
but which are also obtained in different seasons, illumination, and 
weather conditions.
The same technologies can also be employed in the absence of
GNSS to improve the relative navigation of vehicles ﬂying close to 
each other; [35] proposes a LIDAR based algorithm for this pur-
pose, while [36] relies of communications antennas employed as 
relative range sensors. Ground vehicles can also be employed to as-
sist in the aircraft GNSS-Denied navigation, as in the case of [37], 
which employs radio ranging between the ground and ﬂying vehi-
cles.
A different approach that is gaining interest in recent years in-
volves taking advantage of the capability of neural networks to 
map the input-output relationships of a system without a priori 
knowledge of its behavior [38,39]; the network is hence trained 
based on the INS behavior in the presence of GNSS signals with 
the inputs of the different onboard sensors, with the objective of it 
properly estimating the vehicle pose when the GNSS signals are 
no longer available. Artiﬁcial immune systems can also be em-
ployed for GNSS-Denied navigation, in which those variables that 
can characterize the dynamic state of the platform and that can 
be measured with the onboard sensors are assimilated to the anti-
gens, while the antibodies consist of the adjustments applied to 
the dead reckoning integration algorithm [40].
Visual Odometry (VO) consists on employing the ground images 
generated by one or more onboard cameras (either visual or in-
frared) without the use of prerecorded image databases or any 
other sensors, incrementally estimating the vehicle pose based on 
the changes that its motion induces on the images [41–43]. It has 
been employed for navigation of ground robots, road vehicles, and 
multirotors ﬂying both indoors and outdoors. The incremental con-
catenation of relative poses results in a slow but unbounded pose 
drift, which can only be eliminated if aided by Simultaneous Lo-
calization and Mapping (SLAM) [44,45], a particular case of VO in 
which the map of the already viewed terrain is stored and em-
ployed for loop closure in case it is revisited by the vehicle during 
its motion. Modern stand-alone VO algorithms such as SVO (Semi 
Direct Visual Odometry) [46,47] and DSO (Direct Sparse Odometry) 
4
[p.5]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
[48] are robust and exhibit a limited drift, while LSD-SLAM (Large 
scale Semi Dense SLAM) [49] and ORB-SLAM (large scale feature 
based SLAM)3 [50–52] may be more appropriate if the vehicle re-
visits an already imaged area. Vision based techniques can also be 
employed to assist in the short term relative navigation required 
to land a UAV, either on the ground or on a vessel [53–55].
The most comprehensive solution to GNSS-Denied navigation 
appears to be the fusion between the inertial and visual odom-
etry algorithms into an integrated navigation system, which can 
also be combined with image registration. Two different trends ex-
ist for this purpose. The ﬁrst is to employ VO optimizations with 
the assistance of the inertial navigation estimations, reducing the 
pose estimation drift inherent to VO. This is known as Visual In-
ertial Odometry (VIO) [56–60]. Current VIO implementations are 
also primarily intended for ground robots, multirotors, and road 
vehicles, and hence rely exclusively on the readings of the vehi-
cle inertial sensors and the images taken by the onboard camera.
VIO currently represents the state of the art in GNSS-Denied nav-
igation for low SWaP UAVs, and many commercial products now 
utilize proprietary VIO algorithms [5]. Several VIO algorithms are 
available as open source packages; their performance and required 
resources are reviewed in [61].
The second trend or ﬁltering consists on employing the vi-
sual estimations as additional observations with which to feed the 
inertial ﬁlter. In the case of attitude estimation exclusively (mo-
mentarily neglecting the platform position), the GNSS signals are 
helpful and enable the INS to obtain more accurate and less noisy 
estimations, but they are not indispensable, as driftless attitude 
estimations can be obtained based on the IMU without their use. 
Proven techniques for attitude estimation in all kinds of platforms 
that do not rely on GNSS signals include Gaussian ﬁlters [62], de-
terministic ﬁlters [63], complimentary ﬁlters [64], and stochastic 
ﬁlters [65,66]. In the case of the complete pose estimation (both 
attitude and position), it is indispensable to employ the velocity 
or incremental position observations obtained with VO methods in 
the absence of the absolute references provided by GNSS receivers. 
The literature includes cases based on Gaussian ﬁlters [67], and 
more recently nonlinear deterministic ﬁlters [68], stochastic ﬁlters 
[69], Riccati observers [70], and invariant EKFs [71].
Novelty
The VIO solutions listed above focus on how to incorporate the 
inertial estimations (or even the measurements of the inertial sen-
sors without previous ﬁltering) into the VO pipelines in such a way 
that the VO non linear optimizations can take advantage of the ad-
ditional inputs to reduce their inherent pose drift. To increase their 
applicability, these solutions are quite generic with respect to the 
platforms on which they are mounted, with most applications fo-
cused on ground vehicles, indoor robots, and multirotors, as well as 
the sensors employed, which are usually restricted to gyroscopes 
and accelerometers.
This article however focuses on a very speciﬁc case (long dis-
tance GNSS-Denied turbulent ﬂight of ﬁxed wing low SWaP air-
craft), and instead centers on the ﬁrst part of the VIO solution, 
this is, the obtainment of the inertial estimates that are then fed 
to the visual algorithms. Reducing the inertial estimation errors of 
the aircraft attitude and position is expected to redound in more 
accurate and robust VIO estimations, independently of the speciﬁc
VIO implementation, in exchange for more restrictive conditions 
for its applicability. The algorithms proposed below take advan-
tage of the sensors already present onboard ﬁxed wing aircraft and 
the special characteristics of the ﬂight of these platforms to obtain 
3 ORB stands for Oriented FAST and rotated BRIEF, a type of blob feature.
more accurate inertial estimations than what is possible with a 
generic vehicle equipped exclusively with inertial sensors:
• Onboard sensors. It is possible to employ the magnetic ﬁeld 
readings provided by a triad of magnetometers (useful as an 
absolute reference of body yaw to complement that of pitch 
and roll obtained from gravity and the accelerometers), the 
pressure altitude measurements obtained with the barometer 
(employed to limit the error in vertical position), and the air 
velocity recordings supplied by the Pitot tube and air vanes 
(used to limit the error in ground velocity and hence re-
duce the horizontal position drift). Standard ﬁxed wing sys-
tems only employ the air velocity measurements for control 
purposes, unlike the proposed one, which also uses them for 
navigation.
• Motion. In contrast with ground robots and road vehicles, the 
ground velocity of an aircraft is the combination of its air ve-
locity vTAS, a low frequency quasi stationary wind ﬁeld vWIND, 
plus high frequency turbulence vTURB. While GNSS receivers 
provide ground speed readings, only air velocity can be in-
dependently measured by the Pitot tube and air vanes. The 
proposed INS ﬁlter takes advantage of the air velocity mea-
surements and the fact that the wind ﬁeld has a signiﬁcant 
effect on the aircraft kinematics and resulting trajectory but 
very little on the dynamics, in contrast with the turbulence, 
which produces strong accelerations that have a major inﬂu-
ence on the aircraft dynamics and its control system, but that 
evens itself out over time showing little effect on the aircraft 
trajectory.
• GNSS-Denied environment. While the indoors motion of 
ground robots and multirotors can never rely on GNSS sig-
nals, GNSS-Denied scenarios for road vehicles and outdoors 
multirotors are likely short lived and caused by building or ter-
rain blockages. All these platforms can make use of additional 
distance sensors to avoid collisions and smart algorithms to re-
main in the road, and can ultimately stop or land if the GNSS
signals are not recovered. In the case of ﬁxed wing aircraft, 
it can be assumed that GNSS signals are present at the be-
ginning of the ﬂight, and that if they disappear the reason is 
likely to be technical error or intentional action (jamming or 
spamming), so the vehicle needs to be capable of ﬂying for 
long periods of time in GNSS-Denied conditions until reaching 
a recovery location where it can be landed by remote control. 
The consequences of failing to do so are much more severe 
than for all other platforms mentioned above.
Application
The main application of this work is that it provides VIO nav-
igation systems installed onboard ﬁxed wing low SWaP aircraft 
with improved inertial estimations to employ in their visual odom-
etry pipelines, resulting in enhanced GNSS-Denied capabilities. 
In the case that GNSS signals become unavailable in mid ﬂight,
GNSS-Denied navigation is required for the platform to complete 
its mission or return to base without the position and ground 
velocity observations provided by GNSS receivers. The proposed 
algorithms should only be employed in GNSS-Denied conditions, 
and as shown in the following sections, they signiﬁcantly increase 
the possibilities of the aircraft safely reaching the vicinity of the 
intended recovery location, where it can be landed by remote con-
trol.
4. High ﬁdelity stochastic simulation, sensors, and scenarios
To evaluate the performance of the proposed inertial navigation 
algorithms, this article relies on Monte Carlo simulations consisting 
of one hundred runs of two different scenarios based on the high 
5
[p.6]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Fig. 1. Components of the high ﬁdelity simulation. (For interpretation of the colors in the ﬁgure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
ﬁdelity stochastic ﬂight simulation graphically depicted in Fig. 1. 
The simulation models the ﬂight in varying weather and turbulent 
conditions of a low SWaP ﬁxed wing piston engine autonomous
UAV, and has been speciﬁcally developed to analyze the perfor-
mances of different navigation systems in GNSS-Denied conditions. 
Described in detail in [2], the simulation models the inﬂuence on 
the resulting aircraft trajectory of many different factors, such as 
the guidance objectives that make up the mission, the atmospheric 
conditions, the wind ﬁeld, the air turbulence, the local perturba-
tions to the Earth gravity and magnetic ﬁelds, the aircraft aerody-
namic and propulsive performances, its onboard sensors and their 
error sources, the control system that moves the throttle and the 
aerodynamic controls so the trajectory conforms to the guidance 
objectives, and the navigation system that processes the data ob-
tained by the sensors and feeds the control system. The simulation 
also considers the asymmetric ﬂight conditions caused by the sin-
gle engine torque and cross winds [72,73], the inﬂuence of the 
fuel consumption on the aircraft mass and inertial properties, as 
well as the relative position and orientation of the gyroscopes, ac-
celerometers, and camera with respect to the body frame and its 
origin, the aircraft center of mass. The open source C++ implemen-
tation of the high ﬁdelity simulation and the INS proposed below 
is available in [1].
The simulation consists on two distinct processes. The ﬁrst, rep-
resented by the yellow blocks on the left of Fig. 1, focuses on the 
physics of ﬂight and the interaction between the aircraft and its 
surroundings that results in the real aircraft trajectory x = xTRUTH; 
the second, represented by the green blocks on the right, contains 
the aircraft systems in charge of ensuring that the resulting tra-
jectory adheres as much as possible to the mission objectives. It 
includes the different sensors whose output comprise the sensed 
trajectory x = xSENSED, the navigation system in charge of ﬁltering 
it to obtain the estimated trajectory ˆx = xEST, the guidance system 
that converts the reference objectives xREF into the control targets 
δTARGET, and the control system that adjusts the position of the 
throttle and aerodynamic control surfaces δCNTR so the estimated 
trajectory ˆx is as close as possible to the reference objectives xREF. 
As shown in the ﬁgure, the two parts of the simulation are not 
independent. The total system error (TSE) or difference between x
and xREF is the combination of the navigation system error (NSE) or 
difference between x and ˆx and the ﬂight technical error (FTE) or 
difference between ˆx and xREF. In the simulation, the real trajectory 
is integrated at 500 Hz, the sensors and navigation system operate 
at 100 Hz, while the guidance and control systems work at 50 Hz
[2]. As this article focuses on the sensors and navigation, the pe-
riod t is always 0.01 s.
All components of the simulation have been modeled with as 
few simpliﬁcations as possible to increase the realism of the re-
sults, as explained in [2]. With the exception of the aircraft perfor-
mances and its control system, which are deterministic, all other 
simulation components are treated as stochastic and hence vary 
from one execution to the next, enhancing the signiﬁcance of the 
Monte Carlo simulation results.
Sensors
The representation of the different errors introduced by the on-
board sensors is of particular interest for inertial navigation. The 
following tables provide the performance values employed to sim-
ulate the different sensors, although the reader should refer to [3]
for a detailed description of the expressions that provide the mea-
surement errors introduced by the various sensors, as well as for 
an explanation of the process employed to obtain the values shown 
at the tables from the sensors data sheets.
The modeling of the gyroscope and accelerometer triads in-
cludes in-run error sources such as bias drift and system noise, 
run-to-run contributions such as bias offsets, as well as ﬁxed scale 
factor and cross coupling errors, together with uncertainties in the 
exact position and attitude of the IMU with respect to the aircraft 
structure. The baseline performance values shown in Table 1 corre-
spond to the MEMS gyroscopes and accelerometers installed inside 
the Analog Devices ADIS16488A IMU [74].
The magnetometers triad is modeled similarly, but without bias 
drift. The baseline magnetometer features employed in the simula-
tion are shown in Table 2, where the system noise has been taken 
from [7] and the rest of the parameters correspond to the mag-
netometers present inside the Analog Devices ADIS16488A IMU
[74].
The air velocity sensors (TAS for true airspeed, AOA for angle 
of attack, AOS for angle of sideslip) and air data sensors (OSP for 
outside static pressure, OAT for outside air temperature) only con-
sider system noise and bias offset in their measurements, and are 
usually provided by a Pitot tube, air vanes, barometer, and ther-
mometer. The baseline parameters shown in Table 3 correspond to 
the Aeroprobe air data system [75], which is equipped with a multi 
hole Pitot tube.
Scenarios
Two different scenarios are employed to analyze the conse-
quences of losing the GNSS signals. Although a short summary is 
included below, detailed descriptions of the mission, weather, and 
wind ﬁeld employed in each scenario can be found in [2]. Most 
parameters comprising the scenario are deﬁned stochastically, re-
sulting in different values for every execution. Note that all results 
shown in sections 6, 7, and 8 are based on Monte Carlo simula-
tions comprising one hundred runs of each scenario, testing the 
sensitivity of the proposed INS algorithms to a wide variety of 
values in the parameters.
• Scenario #1 has been deﬁned with the objective of adequately 
representing the challenges faced by an autonomous ﬁxed 
wing UAV that suddenly cannot rely on GNSS and hence 
changes course to reach a predeﬁned recovery location sit-
uated at approximately one hour of ﬂight time. In the pro-
cess, in addition to executing an altitude and airspeed adjust-
ment, the autonomous aircraft faces signiﬁcant weather and 
wind ﬁeld changes that make its GNSS-Denied navigation even 
more challenging.
6
[p.7]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Table 1
Performance of “Baseline” gyroscopes and accelerometers.
GYR-ACC Baseline
Variable
Value
Unit
Variable
Value
Unit
Bias Drift
σuGYR
1.42 · 10−4
◦/s1.5
σuACC
6.86 · 10−5
m/s2.5
System Noise
σvGYR
4.30 · 10−3
◦/s0.5
σvACC
4.83 · 10−4
m/s1.5
Scale Factor
sGYR
1.50 · 10−5
-
sACC
5.00 · 10−5
-
Cross Coupling
mGYR
4.35 · 10−5
-
mACC
3.05 · 10−5
-
Bias Offset
B0GYR
2.00 · 10−1
◦/s
B0ACC
1.57 · 10−1
m/s2
Table 2
Performance of “Baseline” magnetometers.
MAG Baseline
Variable
Value
Unit
System Noise
σv,MAG
5.00 · 100
nT · s0.5
Scale Factor & Soft Iron
sMAG
7.50 · 10−4
-
Cross Coupling & Soft Iron
mMAG
9.16 · 10−4
-
Hard Iron
BHI,MAG
1.75 · 102
nT
Bias Offset
B0,MAG
5.00 · 102
nT
With respect to the mission, the stochastic parameters in-
clude the initial airspeed, pressure altitude, and bearing 
(vTAS,INI, HP,INI,χINI), their ﬁnal values (vTAS,END, HP,END,χEND), and 
the time at which each of the three maneuvers is initiated.4
The scenario lasts for tEND = 3800 s, while the GNSS signals 
are lost at tGNSS = 100 s, which does not involve any loss of 
generality as the accuracy of the aircraft pose (attitude and 
position) estimation does not degrade with time when GNSS
signals are available.
The wind ﬁeld is also deﬁned stochastically, as its two pa-
rameters (speed and bearing) are constant both at the be-
ginning (vWIND,INI,χWIND,INI) and conclusion (vWIND,END,χWIND,END) 
of the scenario, with a linear transition in between. The spe-
ciﬁc times at which the wind change starts and concludes also 
vary stochastically among the different simulation runs. As de-
scribed in [2], the turbulence remains strong throughout the 
whole scenario, but its speciﬁc values also vary stochastically 
from one execution to the next.
A similar linear transition occurs with the temperature and 
pressure offsets that deﬁne the atmospheric properties [76], 
as they are constant both at the start (TINI,pINI) and end 
(TEND,pEND) of the ﬂight. In contrast with the wind ﬁeld, the 
speciﬁc times at which the two transitions start and conclude 
are not only stochastic but also different from each other.
Although quite generic, there are two reasons why scenario 
#1 can not constitute the only means employed to evaluate 
the behavior of different GNSS-Denied navigation algorithms. 
On one side, its mission includes three maneuvers (a change 
of bearing, a change of airspeed, and a change of pressure al-
titude), but for the most part it consists of a long straight 
level ﬂight in which the aircraft systems have lots of time 
to recover from estimation errors induced by the maneuvers, 
which are executed quite apart from each other. Additionally, 
the GNSS-Denied position errors incurred by the proposed
INS may exhibit a signiﬁcant dependency on the weather and 
wind changes that occur since the aircraft can no longer em-
ploy the GNSS signals for navigation. The prevalence of these 
errors coupled with the signiﬁcant scenario #1 weather and 
wind changes prevents the detection of smaller error sources 
when analyzing the Monte Carlo simulation results in sec-
tion 6. These two reasons indicate the need for a scenario #2.
• Scenario #2 represents the challenges involved in continuing 
with the original mission upon the loss of the GNSS sig-
nals, executing a series of continuous turn maneuvers over 
4 Turns are executed with a bank angle of ξTURN = ±10◦, altitude changes employ 
an aerodynamic path angle of γTAS,CLIMB = ±2◦, and airspeed modiﬁcations are auto-
matically executed by the control system as set-point changes.
a relatively short period of time with no atmospheric or 
wind variations. As in scenario #1, the GNSS signals are 
lost at tGNSS = 100 s, but the scenario duration is shorter 
(tEND = 500 s). The initial airspeed and pressure altitude (vTAS,INI, 
HP,INI) are deﬁned stochastically and do not change throughout 
the whole scenario; the bearing however changes a total of 
eight times between its initial and ﬁnal values, with all inter-
mediate bearing values as well as the time for each turn vary-
ing stochastically from one execution to the next. Although the 
same turbulence is employed as in scenario #1, the wind and 
atmospheric parameters (vWIND,INI,χWIND,INI,TINI,pINI) remain 
constant throughout scenario #2.
5. Proposed navigation ﬁlter
The INS takes the sensor outputs or sensed trajectory x =
xSENSED and processes them to obtain the estimated trajectory 
ˆx = xEST, which then passes to the guidance and control systems. 
Note that in the simulation all sensors as well as the navigation 
system operate at 100 Hz, with the exception of the GNSS re-
ceiver (until the GNSS signals are lost), which works at 1 Hz. With 
the objective of reducing the NSE (difference between x and ˆx) 
in GNSS-Denied conditions, the proposed architecture divides the 
navigation ﬁlter into three smaller EKFs named the air data, atti-
tude, and position ﬁlters, respectively.
Air data ﬁlter
As the ground velocity is the sum of the air and the wind ve-
locities, and only the former can be observed in GNSS-Denied con-
ditions, the variables describing the aircraft motion with respect to 
the air (airspeed, aerodynamic angles, atmospheric conditions) are 
isolated from the estimation point of view from those that link the 
aircraft to the ground (attitude, ground speed, position), and it is 
hence more computationally eﬃcient to implement a smaller in-
dependent ﬁlter for these variables.
xAIR (t) = [vTAS, α, β, T, HP]T
(1)
yAIR,n =
vTAS, α, β, T, p
T
(2)
The air data ﬁlter state vector xAIR is composed by the airspeed vTAS, 
angle of attack α, angle of sideslip β, atmospheric temperature T, 
and pressure altitude HP, while the observation vector yAIR,n in-
cludes the measurements provided by the Pitot tube vTAS, air vanes 
(α and β), and atmospheric sensors (T and p). Although imple-
mented as an EKF [77], the absence of relationships among the 
state variables implies that for all practical purposes it behaves as 
a low pass ﬁlter. The state and observation equations are the fol-
lowing:
˙xAIR = 0
(3)
vTAS = vTAS
(4)
α = α
(5)
β = β
(6)
T = T
(7)
7
[p.8]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Table 3
Performance of “Baseline” air velocity and air data sensors.
Baseline
Variable
Value
Unit
Baseline
Variable
Value
Unit
TAS System Noise
σvTAS
3.33 · 10−1
m/s
TAS Bias Offset
B0TAS
3.33 · 10−1
m/s
AOA System Noise
σvAOA
3.33 · 10−1
◦
AOA Bias Offset
B0AOA
3.33 · 10−1
◦
AOS System Noise
σvAOS
3.33 · 10−1
◦
AOS Bias Offset
B0AOS
3.33 · 10−1
◦
OSP System Noise
σvOSP
1.00 · 10+2
Pa
OSP Bias Offset
B0OSP
1.00 · 10+2
Pa
OAT System Noise
σvOAT
5.00 · 10−2
K
OAT Bias Offset
B0OAT
5.00 · 10−2
K
p = p0

1 + βT
T0
HP
−g0
βTR
(8)
Expression (8), together with the standard mean sea level tem-
perature and pressure values (T0 and p0), the temperature gradient 
βT, air speciﬁc constant R, and standard acceleration of free fall 
g0, are all taken from the International Civil Aviation Organization 
(ICAO) Standard Atmosphere model or ISA [78].
The navigation ﬁlter tracks the weather by continuously esti-
mating the temperature and pressure offsets (T and p), which 
indicate the deviation of the atmosphere through which the air-
craft ﬂies from the static model provided by ISA. The variation 
with time and horizontal position of these two offsets is the ba-
sis of the non standard ISA model or INSA [76], which estab-
lishes accurate relationships between the atmospheric properties 
(temperature, pressure, density) and altitude that simultaneously 
comply with local observations while verifying all ISA hypotheses. 
Note that the INSA model converges to ISA when both offsets are 
zero.
Estimating the pressure offset ˆp is the task of the position 
ﬁlter, but the temperature offset ˆT is estimated as follows after 
each execution of the air data ﬁlter. Refer to [76] for more details 
on (9):
ˆT = ˆT −T0 −βT ˆHP
(9)
Attitude ﬁlter
The main objective of the attitude ﬁlter is the estimation of 
the aircraft attitude ˆqNB or rotation between the North-East-Down 
(NED) and body frames represented by its unit quaternion [79], 
although it also estimates the angular velocity ˆω
B
NB (from NED to 
body viewed in body), the full gyroscope error ˆEGYR,5 the full mag-
netometer error ˆEMAG,6 and the difference ˆBN
DEV between the Earth 
magnetic ﬁeld provided by the onboard model BN
MOD and the real 
one BN
REAL. The observations are provided by the gyroscopes, which 
measure the angular velocity ωB
IB from the inertial frame7 to the 
body frame viewed in body, the magnetometers that measure the 
magnetic ﬁeld BB in the body frame, and the accelerometers that 
provide the speciﬁc force fB
IB or non gravitational acceleration from 
the inertial to the body frame viewed in body.
xATT (t) =

qNB, ωB
NB, EGYR, EMAG, BN
DEV
T
(10)
yATT,n =
ωB
IB, BB, fB
IB
T
(11)
While the only non zero state equation is that of the unit 
quaternion (12) (refer to [79] for the relationship between the time 
derivative of the unit quaternion and the angular velocity), the 
main novelty of this article lies in the selection of the observation 
equations, which are intended to reduce the negative inﬂuence on 
5 EGYR includes all gyroscopes error sources except system noise as explained in 
[3].
6 EMAG includes all magnetometers error sources except system noise as explained 
in [3].
7 In the simulation, the inertial frame is centered at the Earth center of mass and 
its axes do not rotate with respect to any stars other than the Sun.
the estimation of the aircraft attitude of the inaccurate estimations 
of ground velocity and position in the position ﬁlter caused by the 
lack of GNSS signals. This design should not be employed when
GNSS signals are available as it results in inferior performance 
when the GNSS observations are added to the position ﬁlter, but it 
isolates and protects the attitude ﬁlter estimations in GNSS-Denied 
conditions.
˙qNB = 1
2 qNB ⊗ωB
NB
(12)
˙xATT,OTHER = 0
(13)
pn =

gN
c,MOD, BN
MOD, vN, vN
WIND, ωN
IE, ωN
EN, aN
cor, EACC
T
(14)
ωB
IB = ωB
NB + q∗
NB ⊗
ωN
IE + ωN
EN
	
⊗qNB + EGYR
(15)
BB = q∗
NB ⊗

BN
MOD −BN
DEV
	
⊗qNB + EMAG
(16)
fB
IB = ωB
NB

q∗
NB ⊗

vN −vN
WIND
	
⊗qNB

+q∗
NB ⊗
ωN
EN vN + aN
cor −gN
c,MOD
	
⊗qNB + EACC
(17)
The negative inﬂuence of the inaccurate velocity and position 
estimations is restricted to the pn vector, which contains the grav-
ity gN
c,MOD and magnetism BN
MOD employed in the ﬁlter (which differ 
slightly from the real ones experienced by the aircraft), the aircraft 
ground and wind velocities (vN, vN
WIND) viewed in NED, the Earth 
and motion angular velocities ωN
IE and ωN
EN,8 the Coriolis accelera-
tion aN
cor, and the full accelerometer error EACC.9 The pn vector is 
taken from the previous step execution of the position ﬁlter (ev-
ery pn member can be obtained from the position ﬁlter outputs 
including the geodetic coordinates xGDT, as shown in (18)), and the 
measures taken to reduce its errors and how they spread by means 
of the attitude ﬁlter observation equations are the key to improv-
ing the estimation of the aircraft attitude ˆqNB.
pn = f

xGDT, vN, vN
WIND, EACC
	
(18)
Note that (15), which combines the gyroscope error with the three 
angular velocities that together make up the inertial rotation speed 
ωB
IB, and (16), which adds the magnetometers errors to the true 
magnetic ﬁeld, do not include any simpliﬁcations and are hence 
quite precise, although they are subject to the errors introduced 
by the use of pn when evaluating some of its members.
Expression (17) is the observation equation with the highest 
inﬂuence on the estimation results as well as the least precise. It 
is based on the fact that the speciﬁc force measured by the ac-
celerometers is equal to the non gravitational (aerodynamic and 
propulsive) accelerations, but modiﬁed as described below to re-
duce the negative inﬂuence of the errors present in the pn vector. 
The obtainment of (17) starts with the true expressions of the spe-
ciﬁc force viewed in both the body and NED frames (19), (20), 
8 The Earth angular velocity ωN
IE is that caused by the rotation of the Earth, repre-
sented by the Earth Centered Earth Fixed (ECEF) frame, with respect to the inertial 
frame, and is viewed in NED; the motion angular velocity ωN
EN, also viewed in
NED, represents the angular velocity caused by the motion of the aircraft above 
the curved Earth surface.
9 EACC includes all accelerometers error sources except system noise as explained 
in [3].
8
[p.9]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
which are based on the (57), (58) expressions for the time deriva-
tive of the ground velocity obtained in appendix A:
fB
IB = ωB
EB vB + ˙vB + q∗
NB ⊗

aN
cor −gN
c
	
⊗qNB
= ωB
EB

vB
TAS + vB
TURB + vB
WIND
	
+
˙vB
TAS + ˙vB
TURB + ˙vB
WIND
	
+q∗
NB ⊗

aN
cor −gN
c
	
⊗qNB
(19)
fN
IB = ωN
EN vN + ˙vN + aN
cor −gN
c
= ωN
EN

vN
TAS + vN
TURB + vN
WIND
	
+
˙vN
TAS + ˙vN
TURB + ˙vN
WIND
	
+aN
cor −gN
c
(20)
The process leading to (17) from (19) is the following:
• Discard the air velocity and turbulence time derivatives viewed 
in body (˙vB
TAS, ˙vB
TURB) as they are unknown to the ﬁlter. The 
omission of the turbulence acceleration is of particular im-
portance, as it is usually signiﬁcantly bigger than the errors 
introduced by the accelerometer EACC and hence one of the 
reasons why ˆEACC can not be estimated in the attitude ﬁlter 
without GNSS observations. This results in (21), which only 
represents a middle step in the obtainment of (17) and is 
shown for added clarity:
fB
IB ∼ωB
EB

vB
TAS + vB
TURB + vB
WIND
	
+ ˙vB
WIND
+q∗
NB ⊗

aN
cor −gN
c
	
⊗qNB
= ωB
NB

vB
TAS + vB
TURB + vB
WIND
	
+ ˙vB
WIND
(21)
+ q∗
NB ⊗
ωN
EN

vN
TAS + vN
TURB + vN
WIND
	
+ aN
cor −gN
c

⊗qNB
Discarding the instantaneous accelerations of the air velocity 
and the turbulence viewed in body has negative consequences 
for the ﬁlter accuracy. However, both ˙vB
TAS and ˙vB
TURB roughly 
oscillate around zero (air velocity tends to be constant when 
viewed in body while turbulence oscillates around zero also 
in body) and hence are easily absorbed into the EKF mea-
surement noise respecting its zero mean white noise character 
[77]. This implies that although less accurate, the EKF contin-
ues to provide an unbiased estimation of the state vector.
• Discard the wind ﬁeld time derivatives viewed in NED (˙vN
WIND) 
as the wind is approximately quasi stationary and hence its 
time derivatives are small. Although wind variations may have 
a signiﬁcant inﬂuence in the resulting aircraft trajectory, they 
are too slow and short lived to inﬂuence its dynamics. The 
wind acceleration ˙vN
WIND can hence be assumed to oscillate 
around zero and be absorbed into the measurement noise, re-
sulting in the ﬁlter being less accurate but behaving properly 
and providing unbiased estimations of the state variables [77]. 
Expression (21) thus gets transformed into:
fB
IB ∼ωB
NB

vB
TAS + vB
TURB
	
+q∗
NB ⊗
ωN
EN

vN
TAS + vN
TURB + vN
WIND
	
+ aN
cor −gN
c

⊗qNB
(22)
The obtainment of (17) from (22) is straightforward. Note that 
the product of the motion angular velocity ωEN by the wind 
speed vWIND has not been discarded, while that of the aircraft 
angular velocity ωNB has. This may look counter-intuitive, but 
is correct and better understood by looking at (20).
If GNSS signals are available, it is not necessary to eliminate 
the speed derivatives with time from the speciﬁc force ob-
servation equation. However, in GNSS-Denied conditions, the 
estimation of ˙vN or ˙vB in the position ﬁlter is not accurate 
enough, and hence its usage in (17) would introduce artiﬁcial 
biases resulting in a deterioration of the attitude estimation.
The distinction between eliminating the air velocity and tur-
bulence time derivatives in body and the wind ﬁeld time 
derivative in NED is key for the reduction of the attitude ﬁlter 
estimation errors; as shown in section 7, other options such 
as discarding the whole ground speed time derivative ˙vB when 
operating in GNSS-Denied scenarios result in the introduction 
of artiﬁcial biases during maneuvers and the growth of the at-
titude estimation error.
• Include the difference between the real gravity ﬁeld gN
c,REAL
measured by the accelerometers and gN
c,MOD, which is com-
puted onboard based on the gravity model. These differences 
are too small to be observed during ﬂight and have a minor 
but not negligible inﬂuence on the ﬁlter behavior.
• Although the terms vN, vN
WIND, ωN
EN, aN
cor, and EACC are correct 
as written, they are not state variables but taken or computed 
from the results of the position ﬁlter, and hence may include 
potentially signiﬁcant errors in GNSS-Denied conditions.
Position ﬁlter
Without the absolute position and velocity measurements pro-
vided by the GNSS receiver, the position ﬁlter does not have 
enough observability to avoid errors in its estimations, but nev-
ertheless has two main objectives. On one hand, the estimation of 
the ground position (horizontal and vertical) needs to result in er-
rors that are as small as possible; on the other, it needs to supply 
the attitude ﬁlter with contained pn estimations (14, 18) so they 
do not destabilize the attitude ﬁlter.
xPOS (t) =

fB
IB, EACC
T
(23)
yPOS,n =fB
IB
(24)
˙xPOS = 0
(25)
fB
IB = fB
IB + EACC
(26)
The EKF ﬁlter itself is extremely simple and in fact can not sep-
arate between fB
IB and EACC, which are hence employed together in 
(17). The interesting part lies in those variables that are estimated 
after each ﬁlter step. In the case of the pressure offset p [76]
and the wind velocity vN
WIND, there are not enough observations in
GNSS-Denied conditions to make any proper estimations, so they 
are kept constant from their last GNSS aided estimations. Note that 
the presence of absolute position and velocity observations pro-
vided by the GNSS enables the estimation of ˆpGNSS−BASED and 
ˆvN
WIND,GNSS−BASED by reversing the process described next for GNSS-
Denied conditions.
ˆp = ˆpGNSS−BASED,LAST
(27)
ˆvN
WIND = ˆvN
WIND,GNSS−BASED,LAST
(28)
With the wind estimation kept constant, the ground velocity 
viewed in NED can be estimated by making use of the airspeed 
and angles of attack and sideslip estimated by the air data ﬁlter:
ˆvN
TAS = ˆqNB ⊗vB
TAS

ˆvTAS, ˆα, ˆβ

⊗ˆq∗
NB
(29)
ˆvN = ˆvN
WIND + ˆvN
TAS
(30)
The vertical position h is estimated better from the pressure al-
titude ˆHP than by integrating the ground velocity vN. It is a two 
step process in which the geopotential altitude H is ﬁrst estimated 
based on estimations of the pressure altitude HP, temperature off-
set T, and pressure offset p [76], followed by its conversion 
to geometric altitude according to the spherical Earth model [78], 
where the Earth radius RE is taken from [80].
9
[p.10]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
ˆH = f

ˆHP, ˆT, ˆp

(31)
ˆh = RE · ˆH
RE −ˆH
(32)
Longitude and latitude are ﬁnally obtained by integrating the 
ground velocity estimated above.
6. Navigation system error in GNSS-Denied conditions
This section presents the results obtained with the proposed
INS ﬁlter when executing Monte Carlo simulations of the two
GNSS-Denied scenarios,10 each consisting of one hundred execu-
tions. [2] provides detailed descriptions of the different modules 
of the high ﬁdelity simulation together with the deﬁnition of the 
two scenarios, which are summarized in section 4. [3] explains 
the expressions employed to model the measurement errors intro-
duced by the different sensors, as well as their “baseline” values 
employed in the simulation. A short summary can also be found 
in section 4.
The NSE incurred by the proposed INS when estimating the 
value of the different variables in GNSS-Denied conditions is eval-
uated in the tables below according to the aggregated metrics and 
the aggregated ﬁnal state metrics, both deﬁned in [2]. The aggre-
gated metrics include the mean, standard deviation, and maximum 
value taking as inputs the NSE of every navigation ﬁlter step and 
simulation run,11 while the aggregated ﬁnal state metrics do the 
same but only for the last ﬁlter evaluation in each run.12 When 
depicting the NSE, the ﬁgures below show the variation with time 
of the time aggregated metrics (mean and standard deviation) of the 
one hundred different executions of each scenario; these are also 
deﬁned in [2].
As an example on how to read the tables below, the three right 
hand columns of Table 4 show the aggregated body attitude NSE
for the two scenarios. In the case of scenario #1, the ﬁrst step in-
volves computing the means, standard deviations, and maximum 
values (trajectory metrics) of each of the one hundred executions 
independently, each taking as input the 100 × 3800 + 1 evalua-
tions of the NSE after each navigation ﬁlter step. The aggregated 
metrics are then obtained by again computing the means, standard 
deviations, and maximum values, but this time taking as input only 
the one hundred values of the corresponding trajectory metric. The 
standard deviation of the one hundred trajectory means results in 
0.072◦, while the mean of the one hundred trajectory standard de-
viations is 0.078◦.
Air data estimation
All variables estimated by the air data ﬁlter, this is, those con-
tained in (1) plus T, share the same qualitative NSE results, 
which are independent of the scenario. Measured by the Pitot tube, 
air vanes, and atmospheric sensors, their measurements contain 
system noise plus a run-to-run constant bias offset.13
The individual trajectory metrics of their estimation errors are 
biased (not zero mean) and the aggregated ones are zero mean or 
unbiased, meaning that the bias origin is random and present in 
the data itself, not in the navigation algorithms. No drift is present 
in either the trajectory or the aggregated metrics. The repeatability 
10 All trajectories are executed at the location indicated by the MX (“mix”) terrain 
type, as described in [2].
11 As the navigation system works at 100 Hz and there are 100 runs, this amounts 
to 100 × (100 × 3800 + 1) points for scenario #1 and 100 × (100 × 500 + 1) points 
for scenario #2.
12 This amounts to 100 points for each scenario.
13 The temperature offset T is not directly measured, but per (9) is a linear 
combination of the temperature and pressure altitude, and hence combines their 
measurement errors.
of the results is elevated, as the standard deviation and maximum 
absolute value vary little among different runs. The air data ﬁlter 
hence behaves like a low pass ﬁlter, removing the system noise 
but unable to separate the bias offsets introduced by the sensors, 
which are incorporated in their totality into the estimated values.
The main consequence of the biases lack of observability is that 
the speciﬁc bias offset realizations with which the sensors operate 
in a given run become thresholds that can not be overcome by 
the navigation system. Note that the bias offsets are based on the 
sensors exclusively, so the estimation errors can be considered as 
bounded or limited by the quality of the Pitot tube, air vanes, and 
atmospheric sensors.
Body attitude estimation
Reducing the aircraft body attitude estimation error ∥ˆrB∥=
∥ˆqNB ⊖qNB∥, where ⊖represents the rotations minus operator [79], 
is one of the primary objectives of the INS, and a necessary con-
dition for maintaining ﬂight stability as well as for the fusion be-
tween the inertial and visual navigation algorithms. Experiencing 
no drift in attitude is indispensable for ﬂight viability, as if this 
is not the case, in particular for pitch and roll, at some point the 
aircraft will breach its ﬂight envelope and the control system will 
lose its hold on the platform.
The behavior of the attitude ﬁlter is intrinsically different to 
that of the air data ﬁlter. In addition to the fact that there is no 
sensor directly measuring the body attitude, the errors introduced 
by the attitude ﬁlter sensors include contributions such as bias 
drift, scale factors, and cross coupling errors, that make them sig-
niﬁcantly more challenging to estimate. On the positive side, there 
is some observability of the full gyroscope error EGYR that enables 
its estimation, in contrast with the air data system biases that can 
not be observed.
On a run by run basis, the trajectory metrics indicate that the 
attitude estimation is lightly biased (non zero mean), both for each 
Euler angle (yaw ψ, pitch θ, roll ξ) as well as for the attitude er-
ror ∥ˆrB∥, deﬁned as the norm of the rotation vector between the 
estimated attitude and the real one [81]. Table 4 shows the aggre-
gated metrics of the attitude estimation results for the hundred 
runs of both scenarios. The estimation of each individual Euler 
angle tends to be unbiased (zero mean) when aggregated14; the 
aggregated mean of the attitude error is not zero as it is a norm. 
The aggregated mean of standard deviations is clearly inferior to 
the mean of means, indicating that the body attitude estimation 
errors do not deviate far from their mean value as the trajectories 
progress with time. On the other side, the small values of the ag-
gregated standard deviations when compared with the aggregated 
means shows that the results are very repeatable and highly inde-
pendent from the stochastic characteristics of both scenarios that 
differentiate one run from another. As such, they can be considered 
bounded. It is also worth noting that the aggregated maximums, 
although logically bigger, do not indicate any potential problem 
when considering the wide variety of conditions tested through-
out the hundred runs.
These results show that the proposed attitude ﬁlter is capa-
ble of closely tracking the aircraft attitude during turbulent ﬂight 
both when the ﬂight is mostly straight (scenario #1) as when con-
tinuously executing maneuvers (scenario #2). Maneuvers increase 
observability and help the ﬁlter to identify and reduce attitude 
errors, but they also increase the errors in the ﬁlter observation 
equations, so balancing both requirements is one of the main chal-
lenges when designing the ﬁlter and choosing the ﬁlter process 
and measurement noise values.
14 Unbiased means that the aggregated mean of means tends to zero as the num-
ber of simulation runs increases.
10
[p.11]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Table 4
Aggregated body attitude NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
ˆψ −ψ [◦]
ˆθ −θ [◦]
ˆξ −ξ [◦]
∥ˆrB∥[◦]
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
max | · |
#1
mean
+0.036
0.104
-0.022
0.036
+0.000
0.038
0.152
0.078
0.521
std
0.131
0.015
0.036
0.014
0.027
0.010
0.072
0.021
0.151
max
+0.371
0.161
-0.209
0.083
-0.123
0.063
0.448
0.168
1.321
#2
mean
+0.005
0.107
-0.002
0.043
+0.004
0.043
0.118
0.074
0.376
std
0.058
0.021
0.021
0.009
0.020
0.010
0.023
0.015
0.069
max
+0.170
0.162
+0.065
0.069
+0.074
0.076
0.206
0.124
0.632
Fig. 2. Trajectory body attitude NSE (100 runs).
Fig. 3. Estimated and true body pitch angles θ for run #28 of scenario #1.
Fig. 4. Body attitude NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Fig. 2 shows the individual body attitude mean and standard 
deviation for each of the hundred runs and two scenarios. Most 
are located within a relatively narrow area of similar performance, 
while in a few cases, which correspond to particularly negative 
combinations of the random inputs that make up the scenarios, the 
attitude ﬁlter has signiﬁcantly more diﬃculty tracking the body at-
titude.
Fig. 3 plots the body pitch θ and its estimation ˆθ for a single 
run of scenario #1,15 showing both the signiﬁcant body pitch os-
cillations required to maintain pressure altitude with the aircraft 
15 The trajectory mean for this run is 0.185◦, which is worse than the aggregated 
mean of 0.152◦shown in Table 4.
subjected to an elevated turbulence level, as well as the accurate 
estimation performed by the ﬁlter.
Figs. 4 and 5 show the variation with time of the body atti-
tude NSE for both scenarios, complemented with the two runs 
that result in the best and worst estimations of body attitude. They 
clearly show that the body attitude estimation has no drift with 
time, ensuring that the aircraft can remain aloft in GNSS-Denied 
conditions for as long as there is fuel available.
Full gyroscope errors estimation
Given that the aircraft attitude qNB is the result of integrating 
the aircraft angular velocity ωB
NB, which accounts for the majority 
of the inertial angular velocity ωB
IB, and that the gyroscope mea-
surements ωB
IB also include their full error EGYR, the attitude ﬁlter 
11
[p.12]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Fig. 5. Body attitude NSE for scenario #2 (100 runs).
Fig. 6. Vertical position NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
would not be able to estimate the body attitude if it were not si-
multaneously estimating the full gyroscopes error ˆEGYR.
EGYR encompasses all error sources except system noise [3], in-
cluding the bias offset (constant in each run), the bias drift (which 
behaves as a random walk), the scale factor error, and the cross 
coupling error. The last two sources make tracking the error by 
the attitude ﬁlter signiﬁcantly more challenging, specially during 
maneuvers, when a swift change in the inertial angular velocity 
about a given axis does not only result in measurement changes in 
that same axis, but also in the other two.
The gyroscope error estimation results are qualitatively the 
same as those of the body attitude for both scenarios, this is, 
lightly biased for each trajectory, and unbiased or zero mean for 
each component when aggregated. Being a norm, the full error is 
also biased when aggregated, but as in the case of the body at-
titude, it can be considered bounded, and the results are highly 
repeatable and vary little among different runs.
Vertical position estimation
Figs. 6 and 7 show the variation with time of the vertical posi-
tion NSE for both scenarios, complemented with the two runs that 
result in the lowest and highest altitude ﬁnal error, respectively. As 
the scenario #1 estimation shows an obvious accuracy degradation 
with time, the aggregated metrics are not useful [2] and are re-
placed by the aggregated ﬁnal state metrics, which are shown in 
Table 5.
From the point of view of the geometric altitude estimation, 
the only difference between the two scenarios is that #1 includes 
varying atmospheric conditions, while the weather is constant 
when executing scenario #2. Note that in both cases the aggre-
gated ﬁnal mean is much smaller than the standard deviation and 
maximum absolute value, tending to zero as the number of runs 
grows, which means that the ﬁnal error is unbiased or zero mean. 
There are not any intrinsic errors introduced by the estimation 
process and the individual trajectory errors are caused by random 
processes either in the observations or in the estimation process 
itself.
Table 5
Aggregated ﬁnal vertical position NSE (100 runs).
ˆhEND [m]
Scenario #1
Scenario #2
mean
-3.89
+0.76
std
26.03
7.55
max
-70.49
-19.86
Careful examination of the above ﬁgures reveals several facts. 
First of all, the geometric altitude estimation error does not in-
crease when the GNSS signals are lost at tGNSS = 100 s, although 
it becomes noisier. Second, the error at the beginning of the tra-
jectories is not only constant, but it is also exactly the same for 
both scenarios. However, while in the case of scenario #2 it re-
mains constant for the whole trajectory, in #1 the error increases 
between two clearly deﬁned time stamps and then remains con-
stant again until the end of the trajectory.
The deviation with time in Fig. 6 is constrained to in between 
two time stamps, which is the case in all scenario #1 runs, as it is 
not related to the mission altitude change, but to its linear pres-
sure offset p weather change, as explained in [2] and section 4. If 
the pressure offset variation were modeled differently, then the ge-
ometric altitude deviation with time would also vary accordingly. 
Fig. 7 does not show any deviation with time because p is con-
stant in scenario #2.
At the beginning of both scenarios, when GNSS signals are 
present, the position ﬁlter employs additional position and ground 
velocity observation equations, and hence the ionospheric effects 
constitute the main source of error for the vertical position esti-
mation. In addition, the navigation ﬁlter does not only estimate 
the temperature offset T but also the pressure offset p, incur-
ring in relatively small errors caused not only by the ionospheric 
effects but also by the thermometer and barometer bias offsets.
When the GNSS signals are lost, the ﬁlter does not have enough 
observations to properly estimate p, so it keeps the estimation 
constant per (27). This process thus incorporates the pressure off-
set variation between the time at which the geometric altitude 
is estimated and the time at which the GNSS signals are lost as 
12
[p.13]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Fig. 7. Vertical position NSE for scenario #2 (100 runs).
Fig. 8. East ground speed NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
the fourth primary error source. Finally, the estimation of the ge-
ometric altitude in GNSS-Denied conditions by means of (31) and 
(32) effectively reverses the process performed to obtain p when
GNSS was available, eliminating the dependencies with the bias 
offsets of the thermometer and barometer, which are constant for 
a given run.
The ﬁnal vertical position estimation error hence depends on 
two factors, the GNSS ionospheric errors and the variation in at-
mospheric pressure offset pEND −pINI, both bounded by atmo-
spheric physics. However, while the ionospheric effects represent a 
lower error threshold that can not be avoided even by using GNSS, 
the pressure offset change is only a factor in the case of GNSS-
Denied navigation and disappears when employing the GNSS sig-
nals. The geometric altitude estimation hence does not experience 
an unbounded drift but an error with known bounded sources.
To verify this explanation, the one hundred runs of scenario #1
have been repeated with the only difference being that the GNSS
signals are always available (tGNSS > 3800 s), resulting in +0.99, 
7.51, and +17.09 m for the aggregated ﬁnal mean, standard de-
viation, and maximum absolute value, respectively. Note that these 
values are very similar to those shown for scenario #2 in Table 5.
The values of the ﬁnal state metrics shown in Table 5 are ad-
equate for all navigation applications except landing. As explained 
in section 7, estimating the geometric altitude this way is intrinsi-
cally superior to integrating the vertical speed, in which the error 
grows with time without bounds.
Ground velocity estimation
The explanation of the ground velocity NSE results is very sim-
ilar to that of the vertical position in the previous section. Fig. 8
shows the variation with time of the East ground velocity NSE for 
scenario #1, while Fig. 9 represents that of the North velocity NSE
for scenario #2. As an accuracy degradation with time is present 
in scenario #1, Table 6 employs aggregated ﬁnal state metrics to 
show the results [2]. From the point of view of the ground veloc-
ity estimation, the only difference between both scenarios is that 
#1 includes varying wind, which is constant in scenario #2.
Table 6
Aggregated ﬁnal ground speed NSE (100 runs).
ˆvN
END [m/s]
Scenario #1
Scenario #2
ˆvN
1 −vN
1
ˆvN
2 −vN
2
ˆvN
1 −vN
1
ˆvN
2 −vN
2
mean
+0.32
+0.46
-0.08
-0.14
std
2.59
2.20
0.65
0.63
max
+9.32
+7.39
-1.92
-1.79
As with the vertical position, the estimation process does not 
introduce any errors, so the ﬁnal errors are unbiased or zero mean. 
These ﬁgures reveal that the ground velocity estimation error is 
extremely small when GNSS signals are available, but suddenly in-
creases when the GNSS signals are lost at tGNSS = 100 s, after which 
they are approximately stable. These errors are exactly the same 
for both scenarios. However, while in the case of scenario #2 the 
errors remain approximately constant for the whole trajectory, in 
#1 they increase again between two clearly deﬁned time stamps, 
after which they remain constant until the end of the trajectory.
The deviation with time in Fig. 8 is constrained to in between 
two time stamps, which is the case in all scenario #1 runs, as 
it is not related to the mission airspeed change but to its linear 
wind ﬁeld change, as explained in [2] and section 4. If the wind 
ﬁeld variation were modeled differently, then the ground speed 
deviation with time would also vary accordingly. Fig. 9 does not 
show any deviation with time because vN
WIND is constant in scenario 
#2.
The estimation of the air velocity ˆvN
TAS per (29) is the same in-
dependently of whether GNSS signals are available or not. It is a 
combination of the estimated body attitude ˆqNB and the body air 
velocity ˆvB
TAS.16 Both are biased but drift-less on a trajectory basis, 
with their errors bounded by the quality of the sensors, and hence 
so is ˆvN
TAS.
If GNSS signals are available, the position ﬁlter accurately es-
timates the ground velocity ˆvN mostly based on the unbiased ob-
16 vB
TAS is a function of the airspeed vTAS, the angle of attack α, and the angle of 
sideslip β, all estimated by the air data ﬁlter.
13
[p.14]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Fig. 9. North ground speed NSE for scenario #2 (100 runs).
servations provided by the GNSS receiver and then subtracts ˆvN
TAS
to estimate the wind ﬁeld ˆvN
WIND, so the wind estimation errors are 
mostly those of ˆvN
TAS but with the opposite sign. The process is re-
versed in GNSS-Denied conditions (30), as the wind estimation is 
frozen from its value when the GNSS signals are lost (28), and the 
ground velocity is estimated by adding ˆvN
TAS and the frozen wind 
estimation. As such, the GNSS-Denied ˆvN error also includes any 
change in the wind velocity that occurs from the time the GNSS
signals are lost to the time the ground speed is estimated.
The ground velocity estimation error is caused by the three 
factors mentioned above: the errors in the body air velocity es-
timation ˆvB
TAS, the errors in the body attitude estimation ˆqNB, and 
the horizontal wind variation experienced by the aircraft from the 
time the GNSS signals are lost to the time its ground speed is 
estimated vN
WIND,END −vN
WIND,INI. The ﬁrst two are responsible for the 
sudden increase in the error at tGNSS = 100 s that can be observed 
in both scenarios, while the third is the culprit of the additional 
error that only occurs in #1.
In practical terms, the ﬁrst two error sources are bounded by 
sensor quality and establish a threshold for the ground velocity 
estimation accuracy, while the wind variation, although bounded 
by atmospheric physics, has the most potential to induce errors in 
the ground speed estimation, which hence does not present an un-
bounded drift but a bounded error with known bounded sources. 
As explained in section 7, estimating the ground velocity this way 
is intrinsically superior to integrating the speciﬁc force, in which 
the error grows with time without any limitations.
Horizontal position estimation
In GNSS-Denied conditions the horizontal position is estimated 
by the position ﬁlter through the integration of the ground velocity 
without any observations to reset the integration errors. Figs. 10
and 11 show the variation with time of the horizontal position
NSE for both scenarios, together with the two runs with the high-
est and lowest ﬁnal error, respectively.
The approximately linear position drift observed in both ﬁg-
ures is caused by the integration of the approximately constant 
horizontal velocity error, and can not be avoided unless additional 
observations are included into the GNSS-Denied position ﬁlter. The 
only way to eliminate the position drift with a standard suite of 
sensors in GNSS-Denied conditions is to reduce the ground ve-
locity error, whose origins are explained in detail in the previous 
section.
As in previous cases, aggregated ﬁnal state metrics are em-
ployed since drift is present, and these are shown in Table 7 for 
both scenarios. Note that this table includes the horizontal distance 
error both in absolute terms as well as a relative percentage with 
respect to the distance ﬂown since the GNSS signals are lost. In 
addition to the horizontal error, which is a norm and hence al-
ways positive, Table 7 also includes the cross track and long track 
errors, which are positive when the estimated position lies to the 
right or ahead of the real position, and negative otherwise. These 
are unbiased or zero mean, indicating that the error source is in 
the data (the ground velocity) and not in the algorithm itself (the 
integration).
The results for scenario #1, which contains a signiﬁcant wind 
ﬁeld variation, show that in most cases the deviations from the 
intended route are not severe, but a mean error of 7.18% and 
standard deviation of 5.73% are not suﬃcient to ensure safe GNSS-
Denied navigation under any circumstances. They translate into 
absolute position errors that are in the order of several kilometers 
after one hour of ﬂight, which is not acceptable as the risk of col-
lision with the terrain, structures, or other aircraft is too high. The 
results for scenario #2, which are optimistic since it assumes zero 
wind variation, can be considered as a best case threshold show-
ing the inﬂuence of the remaining sources of error: the air velocity 
sensors quality inﬂuencing ˆvB
TAS, the inertial sensors quality for ˆqNB, 
and the ground velocity integration errors.
Table 8 compares the scenario #1 results with those obtained 
by means of a simple time integral of the wind variation with 
respect to that existing when the GNSS signals are lost. The sim-
ilarity with the aggregated ﬁnal state metrics shown in Table 7
proves that the wind variation is by far the main responsible for 
the horizontal position drift. The selected approach to estimating 
the horizontal position, although resulting in a drift with time, is 
intrinsically superior to a double integration of the acceleration, as 
explained in section 7.
7. Comparison with other navigation algorithms
This section compares the results obtained with the proposed
INS ﬁlter, referred below as the “baseline”, against those obtained 
when employing different algorithms for the estimation of the hor-
izontal position, vertical position, and body attitude. These algo-
rithms are more representative of those employed by a traditional
GNSS-Based inertial navigation ﬁlter that at a given time is forced 
to operate without the observations provided by its GNSS receiver.
Different horizontal position algorithms
The position ﬁlter relies on freezing the wind speed estimation 
(28) at the value it has when the GNSS signals are lost, which may 
not appear as optimum as it allows the horizontal position estima-
tion error to grow linearly with time with a slope proportional to 
the wind change since the beginning of GNSS-Denied navigation.
In this section the baseline approach is compared with two al-
ternative implementations that provide better results for the ﬁrst 
few minutes of GNSS-Denied navigation. However, as they have a 
higher reliance on integration, their error growth with time is of 
higher order than in the baseline, resulting in much higher esti-
mation errors. As a matter of fact, the ground velocity errors are 
so signiﬁcant as time grows that they destabilize the attitude ﬁl-
ter by means of (14) and (18), and hence it is necessary to shorten 
14
[p.15]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Fig. 10. Horizontal position NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Fig. 11. Horizontal position NSE for scenario #2 (100 runs).
Table 7
Aggregated ﬁnal horizontal position NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
Distance
ˆxCROSS,END
ˆxLONG,END
ˆxHOR,END
[m]
[m]
[%]
[m]
[%]
[m]
[%]
#1
mean
108623
+59
+0.13
+41
+0.08
7428
7.18
std
19935
+5615
+5.07
+6965
+7.66
4988
5.73
max
172842
-18954
-16.40
+20064
+32.22
25288
32.38
#2
mean
14198
-37
-0.26
+22
+0.15
216
1.52
std
1176
+162
+1.15
+180
+1.28
119
0.86
max
18253
+562
+4.20
+537
+4.12
586
4.38
Fig. 12. Inﬂuence of ﬁlter algorithms on horizontal position NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Table 8
Final horizontal position NSE analysis for scenario #1.
Distance
ˆxHOR,END
vWIND accum.
[m]
[m]
[%]
[m]
[%]
mean
108623
7428
7.18
7121
6.96
std
19935
4988
5.73
4988
5.96
max
172842
25288
32.38
23630
32.95
the scenario #1 simulations to tEND = 1000 s. This could have been 
mitigated by further modiﬁcations to the attitude ﬁlter, which have 
not been implemented as the results are in any case clearly infe-
rior to those of the baseline.
• The ﬁrst alternative, named “double integration”, behaves as a 
standard GNSS-Based inertial ﬁlter [6,7] working without the 
periodic ground speed and position observations provided by 
the GNSS receiver. It relies on discarding (28), (29), and (30), 
and instead estimates the ground speed ˆvN by integrating its 
time derivative, which in turn is obtained based on (20) from 
the estimations of the speciﬁc force ˆfB
IB and the body attitude 
ˆqNB:
ˆ˙vN = ˆqNB ⊗ˆfB
IB ⊗ˆq∗
NB −ˆω
N
EN ˆvN
n−1 + ˆgN
c,MOD −ˆaN
cor
(33)
ˆvN = ˆvN
n−1 + t · ˆ˙vN
(34)
Note that the motion angular velocity ˆω
N
EN and the Coriolis 
acceleration ˆaN
cor depend on position and velocity, while the 
model gravity acceleration ˆgN
c,MOD is computed based exclu-
sively on position. In (33) all three are evaluated based on the 
previous step (n −1). As in the baseline, the position is then 
15
[p.16]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Fig. 13. Short term inﬂuence of ﬁlter algorithms on horizontal position NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
estimated by integrating the ground velocity. The main weak-
ness of this approach is the low accuracy of the speciﬁc force 
estimation ˆfB
IB in the GNSS-Denied position ﬁlter, which is in-
tegrated twice to obtain the aircraft position.
This approach is valid for GNSS-Based conditions, not only be-
cause the velocity and position estimations on which ˆω
N
EN, ˆaN
cor, 
and ˆgN
c,MOD rely are more accurate, but also because the GNSS
observations impede the accumulation of integration errors. 
Without these observations, nothing prevents the errors from 
accumulating as the time without GNSS signals increases.
• The second alternative, named “wind integration”, also esti-
mates the ground speed time derivative per (33). This ap-
proach however tries to reduce the integration errors required 
to obtain ˆvN per (34) by only integrating the wind derivative 
ˆ˙vN
WIND instead of the complete ground speed derivative ˆ˙vN [82]. 
As the proposed ﬁlter, it takes advantage of the air velocity 
sensors present in ﬁxed wing aircraft that however are gen-
erally employed for control purposes exclusively, and not for 
navigation. To do so, it is ﬁrst necessary to directly estimate 
the air velocity time derivative viewed in body ˆ˙vB
TAS by using 
the estimations of its components (ˆ˙vTAS, ˆ˙α, ˆ˙β) provided by the 
air data ﬁlter. From there, the air velocity time derivative in
NED (ˆ˙vN
TAS) is obtained per (35). The estimated ground speed 
ˆvN can then be obtained by combining the air velocity with 
the integrated wind speed (38). As in the ﬁrst alternative, the 
position is also obtained by integrating the resulting ground 
velocity.
ˆ˙vN
TAS = ˆqNB ⊗

ˆ˙vB
TAS + ˆω
B
NB ˆvB
TAS

⊗ˆq∗
NB
(35)
ˆ˙vN
WIND = ˆ˙vN −ˆ˙vN
TAS
(36)
ˆvN
WIND = ˆvN
WIND,n−1 + t · ˆ˙vN
WIND
(37)
ˆvN = ˆvN
WIND + ˆqNB ⊗vB
TAS

ˆvTAS, ˆα, ˆβ

⊗ˆq∗
NB
(38)
Figs. 12 and 1317 show the results obtained with these two 
approaches for scenario #1 when compared with those of the 
baseline ﬁlter. The ﬁgures for scenario #2 are not included as they 
would show exactly the same trends. Fig. 12 shows the whole du-
ration of scenario #1 (tEND = 3800 s), where the two alternative 
executions are limited to tEND = 1000 s as explained above, while 
Fig. 13 provides more detail into the ﬁrst few minutes of GNSS-
Denied conditions. They clearly show that although the alternative 
approaches may prove advantageous for a short period of time 
after the GNSS signals are lost at tGNSS = 100 s, the higher order 
integration errors soon take over and make these alternatives far 
inferior to the proposed position ﬁlter.
The reason for this behavior originates in the additional inte-
grations required to estimate the horizontal position. This analysis 
17 Note that the blue lines of Figs. 12 and 13 are the same as those of Fig. 10.
validates the position ﬁlter approach of freezing the wind speed 
to its estimated value at tGNSS (28). While any wind variation from 
that time on accumulates as ground velocity and horizontal po-
sition errors, these are bounded by atmospheric physics, which 
is preferred to the quick and unrestrained position error growth 
caused by alternative approaches that rely on double integrations.
Different vertical position algorithms
The position ﬁlter does not integrate the vertical speed to ob-
tain the vertical position or geometric altitude, but instead esti-
mates it through (31) and (32) from the pressure altitude ˆHP and 
temperature offset ˆT estimated by the air data ﬁlter, together 
with the pressure offset ˆp estimated at the time the GNSS sig-
nals are lost (27). This approach leaves the vertical position estima-
tion susceptible to atmospheric pressure changes, and results in an 
estimation error that is bounded by atmospheric physics, but pro-
portional to the amount of pressure offset p change from tGNSS
to the time the vertical position is being estimated. The baseline 
approach is compared in this section with two alternative imple-
mentations that rely on integrating the estimated vertical speed.
• The ﬁrst, named “integration”, obtains the geometric altitude 
in the same way as the longitude and latitude, this is, by in-
tegrating the ground speed ˆvN obtained per (30). This results 
in:
ˆh = ˆhn−1 + t · ˆ˙h = ˆhn−1 −t · ˆvN
3
(39)
• The second alternative, named “airspeed integration”, imposes 
zero vertical wind and only integrates the vertical component 
of the air velocity. This approach takes into account the fact 
that the vertical wind is always very close to zero in the long 
term and only appears for short periods of time caused by 
gusts or when ﬂying close to the terrain.
ˆvN
3 ≈ˆvN
TAS,3 =

ˆqNB ⊗vB
TAS

ˆvTAS, ˆα, ˆβ

⊗ˆq∗
NB


3
(40)
ˆh = ˆhn−1 + t · ˆ˙h = ˆhn−1 −t · ˆvN
3
(41)
Fig. 1418 shows that although the second alternative is better 
than the ﬁrst one, their performances are in both cases clearly in-
ferior to that of the baseline. As in the previous section, the reason 
is that the unbounded integration of a noisy signal accumulates er-
rors and needs to be avoided. In the case of the baseline, there is 
no integration, and the vertical position error depends on the iono-
spheric effects plus the variation in pressure offset since the GNSS
signals are lost. Both are bounded by atmospheric physics and 
hence so is the resulting error. Note that the geometric altitude 
errors are so signiﬁcant that on some executions they destabilize 
the ﬁlter, and hence it has been necessary to shorten the scenario 
18 Note that the blue lines of Figs. 14 are the same as those of Fig. 6.
16
[p.17]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Fig. 14. Inﬂuence of ﬁlter algorithms on vertical position NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
#1 simulations to tEND = 1000 s. The scenario #2 ﬁgure is not in-
cluded as it would show exactly the same trends.
This analysis validates the approach of obtaining the vertical 
position or geometric altitude by means of the pressure altitude 
estimation by the air data ﬁlter while avoiding any integrations. 
Although atmospheric pressure changes then transform into verti-
cal position errors, they are bounded by atmospheric physics and 
do not drift with time.
Different attitude algorithms
The key characteristic of the proposed navigation ﬁlter is its 
ability to obtain a bounded and drift-less body attitude estima-
tion in GNSS-Denied conditions while in turbulent ﬂight, which is 
achieved by reducing the negative inﬂuence of the ground veloc-
ity and position estimation errors. In particular, the attitude ﬁlter 
discards the air velocity and turbulence time derivatives viewed 
in the body frame (˙vB
TAS = 0, ˙vB
TURB = 0) and the wind ﬁeld time 
derivative viewed in NED (˙vN
WIND = 0), resulting in (17). The dis-
carded derivatives roughly oscillate around zero and hence their 
absence can be absorbed into the ﬁlter measurement noise, result-
ing in a ﬁlter that although noisier, maintains its unbiased nature 
and hence follows to a higher degree the EKF design assumptions 
[77].
This section analyzes two different alternatives. Although sim-
pler to establish, both incur in biased observations of the speciﬁc 
force that result in higher body attitude estimation errors when 
executing maneuvers, as shown below. The ﬁrst option, named 
“Zero FB Time Derivatives”, discards the full ground speed time 
derivative viewed in the body frame (˙vB
TAS = 0, ˙vB
TURB = 0, ˙vB
WIND = 0), 
resulting in:
fB
IB ∼ωB
EB

vB
TAS + vB
TURB + vB
WIND
	
+ q∗
NB ⊗

aN
cor −gN
c
	
⊗qNB
(42)
fB
IB = ωB
NB

q∗
NB ⊗vN ⊗qNB

+ q∗
NB ⊗
ωN
EN vN + aN
cor −gN
c,MOD
	
⊗qNB + EACC
(43)
The second option, named “Zero FN Time Derivatives”, also dis-
cards the full ground speed time derivative but this time viewed 
in NED (˙vN
TAS = 0, ˙vN
TURB = 0, ˙vN
WIND = 0), resulting in:
fB
IB ∼q∗
NB ⊗
ωN
EN

vN
TAS + vN
TURB + vN
WIND
	
⊗qNB
+q∗
NB ⊗

aN
cor −gN
c
	
⊗qNB
(44)
fB
IB = q∗
NB ⊗
ωN
EN vN + aN
cor −gN
c,MOD
	
⊗qNB + EACC
(45)
The aggregated body attitude NSE for the baseline conﬁgura-
tion as well as the two alternatives is shown in Table 9,19 while 
their variations with time are depicted in Figs. 15, 16,20 and 17.21
19 Note that the baseline columns of Table 9 coincide with the right hand side of 
Table 4.
20 Note that Fig. 16 represents an augmented view of the ﬁrst 500 s of Fig. 15.
21 Note that blue lines of Figs. 15 and 16 coincide with those of Fig. 4, and the 
blue lines of Fig. 17 coincide with those of Fig. 5.
If the beginning of Fig. 15 is excluded, focusing exclusively on 
that portion of scenario #1 in which the bearing is constant, the 
two alternatives result in body attitude estimation errors that are 
quite similar to those of the baseline conﬁguration. As a matter 
of fact, the “Zero FN Time Derivatives” conﬁguration performs con-
sistently better than the baseline, while the “Zero FB Time Deriva-
tives” conﬁguration results are worse and also present a slight drift 
with time that however is slow enough so as to not represent any 
problem from a ﬂight stability point of view.
However, the two alternative conﬁgurations incur in signiﬁcant 
errors in the turn or change of bearing present in scenario #1
(refer to [2] for details, or section 4 for a summary of the sce-
nario), which starts at tTURN and lasts until the ﬁnal bearing χEND is 
reached. To better visualize the aircraft turns, Fig. 16, in addition 
to focusing on the ﬁrst 500 s of the scenario #1, adds an extra line 
(green) that contains the number of runs at every time instant in 
which the aircraft is executing the turning maneuver.22
Note that the body attitude error for the two alternatives does 
not only increase quickly when the aircraft is turning, but contin-
ues doing so for at least a minute after the turn concludes, and 
then takes several minutes for it to return to levels comparable to 
what they were before initiating the turning maneuver. A close ex-
amination of the data reveals that the maximum error is directly 
related to the duration of the turn as the errors never stop increas-
ing until after the aircraft has concluded its turn. Also, different 
executions in which turns are performed at bank angles different 
than ξTURN ± 10◦result in errors that are proportional not only to 
the turn duration (or change of bearing) but also to the bank angle 
employed.
This behavior is emphasized in scenario #2, which is based on 
a series of consecutive turns with very little time in between (re-
fer to [2] for details, or section 4 for a summary of the scenario). 
Fig. 17 clearly shows the beneﬁts of the baseline conﬁguration, as 
the estimation error in the two alternatives accumulates because 
it does not have time after a given turn to return to its pre-turn 
levels before the next turning maneuver is initiated.
The reason why the performance of the three conﬁgurations is 
similar when not executing any maneuvers but markedly different 
when turning lies in the nature of the air velocity, turbulence, and 
wind ﬁeld derivatives with time. When in stationary straight ﬂight, 
all three roughly oscillate around zero when viewed in any frame 
and the effect of including or removing them from (17) is slight; 
this is not the case when turning, in which case the air velocity 
and turbulence are approximately constant only when viewed in 
body, while the wind ﬁeld needs to be viewed in NED. Although it 
is not possible to fully observe these derivatives in GNSS-Denied 
conditions, the baseline conﬁguration manages to avoid introduc-
ing signiﬁcant biases into the ﬁlter at the expense of increasing its 
white noise, while the two alternatives add biases, resulting in the 
22 For example, a value of 2.8 at time ts means that twenty-eight out of the 
hundred runs are executing its turn at time ts, while seventy-two either have not 
started it or have already concluded the turning maneuver.
17
[p.18]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Table 9
Inﬂuence of ﬁlter algorithms on aggregated body attitude NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
Baseline
Zero FB Diffs.
Zero FN Diffs.
∥ˆrB∥[◦]
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
#1
mean
0.152
0.078
0.521
0.199
0.137
1.116
0.223
0.462
4.501
std
0.072
0.021
0.151
0.126
0.104
0.971
0.084
0.264
2.374
max
0.448
0.168
1.321
0.742
0.588
5.152
0.487
1.107
9.819
#2
mean
0.118
0.074
0.38
0.565
0.508
1.77
1.902
1.934
6.88
std
0.023
0.015
0.07
0.405
0.404
1.28
0.407
0.317
1.11
max
0.206
0.124
0.63
1.860
1.943
5.45
3.161
2.860
9.82
Fig. 15. Inﬂuence of ﬁlter algorithms on body attitude NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Fig. 16. Detail of inﬂuence of ﬁlter algorithms on body attitude NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Fig. 17. Inﬂuence of ﬁlter algorithms on body attitude NSE for scenario #2 (100 runs).
ﬁlter producing incorrect body attitude estimations to compensate 
them.
The proposed attitude ﬁlter observation algorithms result in a 
better estimation performance when faced with the lack of ob-
servability inherent to GNSS-Denied navigation. By neglecting the 
different speeds (air velocity, wind, turbulence) derivatives with 
time when viewed in certain reference frames, it is possible to 
maintain the unbiased nature of the ﬁlter at the expense of in-
creasing its noise.
8. Inﬂuence of sensor quality on GNSS-Denied navigation
This section analyzes the inﬂuence of the quality of the dif-
ferent aircraft sensors on the performance of the INS in GNSS-
Denied conditions. It discusses the inﬂuence of the bias drift oscil-
lation band for the inertial sensors, as well as that of the perfor-
mance parameters of gyroscopes, accelerometers, magnetometers, 
air speed sensors, and atmospheric sensors.
18
[p.19]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Table 10
Inﬂuence of inertial biases oscillation band on aggregated body attitude NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
Baseline
±300 · σu · t1/2
±1000 · σu · t1/2
∥ˆrB∥[◦]
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
#1
mean
0.152
0.078
0.521
0.164
0.089
0.567
0.175
0.096
0.590
std
0.072
0.021
0.151
0.070
0.023
0.151
0.074
0.024
0.154
max
0.448
0.168
1.321
0.451
0.173
1.339
0.469
0.178
1.399
#2
mean
0.118
0.074
0.376
0.125
0.077
0.394
0.128
0.079
0.399
std
0.023
0.015
0.069
0.027
0.016
0.080
0.030
0.017
0.081
max
0.206
0.124
0.632
0.234
0.122
0.661
0.239
0.144
0.672
Fig. 18. Inﬂuence of inertial biases oscillation band on body attitude NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
The analysis relies on repeating the Monte Carlo simulations for 
both scenarios composed of one hundred runs each with the only 
change of replacing the performance parameters shown in [3] and 
section 4, referred to as the “baseline” conﬁguration, with others 
representing higher or lower quality sensors, and then comparing 
the NSE obtained by the navigation system.
The main objective of this analysis is to determine the inﬂuence 
that each of the sensors has on the aircraft GNSS-Denied naviga-
tion capabilities. By ensuring that the result obtained when em-
ploying sensors of inferior quality are qualitatively the same and 
quantitatively slightly inferior to those obtained with the baseline 
conﬁguration, the simulation results are safeguarded from possible 
errors introduced in [3] when modeling the performances of the 
different sensors.
Inﬂuence of inertial sensors bias stability
In the description of the different error sources present in the 
output of the inertial sensors (accelerometers and gyroscopes) con-
tained in [3], the bias drift is modeled as a random walk process 
obtained by the integration of a white noise signal. However, as 
the bias drift is mostly a warm-up process that stabilizes with 
the sensor temperature, the random walk is not allowed to vary 
freely (which would not be realistic) but is constrained to a band 
of ±100 · σu · t1/2, this is, it is only allowed to accumulate a hun-
dred times in the same direction.
Although limiting the random walk oscillation is the proper 
way to model its inﬂuence, the ±100 value is arbitrary and if opti-
mistic may facilitate the tracking of the gyroscope and accelerom-
eter errors (EGYR and EACC) by the navigation ﬁlter, limiting the 
negative consequences of failing to appropriately estimate these 
errors. For that reason, this analysis relaxes this limitation in two 
different conﬁgurations, to ±300 and ±1000 (simultaneously for 
the gyroscopes and accelerometers), and evaluates the sensitivity 
of the results to this change.
Relaxing the width of the band in which the inertial sensors 
bias drift can oscillate results in a quantitatively inferior estimation 
of the body attitude, as shown in Table 10, together with Figs. 18
and 19,23 although qualitatively the estimation remains bounded 
and drift-less.
The capability of the attitude ﬁlter to estimate the body atti-
tude is based on its ability to track the full gyroscope error EGYR. 
Fig. 20 shows how the ﬁlter tracks EGYR with a slight delay that is a 
compromise between allocating the changes observed in the mea-
sured inertial angular velocity ωB
IB to the aircraft angular velocity 
ˆω
B
NB or the full gyroscope error ˆEGYR. This balance is determined 
by the selection of the attitude ﬁlter covariances, and is optimized 
for the baseline conﬁguration. It is possible to adjust the covari-
ances so the ﬁlter tracks the gyroscope errors more closely (with 
less delay), but this also implies signiﬁcantly higher errors when 
maneuvering in which a higher percentage of the real ωB
NB would 
be allocated to the gyroscope errors ˆEGYR, as on the short term the 
ﬁlter can not distinguish between real angular velocities and gyro-
scope errors.
If the sensors bias drift oscillates within a wider band, the 
tracking delay at times may translate into bigger ˆEGYR errors, 
in particular when the real error EGYR accumulates a signiﬁcant 
change over a relatively small period of time. This can be better 
understood by looking at a speciﬁc case, such as in Fig. 20, which 
shows the 2nd component of the gyroscope error EGYR,2 and its es-
timation ˆEGYR,2 resulting from run #10 of scenario #1, for the three 
conﬁgurations. Note that between approximately 400 and 800 s, 
the random walk quickly accumulates creating ever higher bias 
drift values, and this is precisely where the tracking delay causes 
higher ˆEGYR errors, and hence bigger ∥ˆrB∥errors.
As shown in Tables 11 and 12,24 as long as the body attitude 
estimation remains bounded and drift-less, the inﬂuence of the 
attitude estimation accuracy on the horizontal velocity and posi-
tion estimations is rather small. Note that the ground velocity and 
horizontal position results in the three conﬁgurations are identi-
cal for all practical purposes both for scenario #1, which is mostly 
stationary but contains varying wind, as for #2, which contains 
23 Note that the baseline columns of Table 10 coincide with the right hand 
columns of Table 4, and the blue lines of Figs. 18 and 19 coincide with those of 
Figs. 4 and 5, respectively.
24 Note that the baseline columns of Tables 11 and 12 coincide with those of Ta-
bles 6 and 7.
19
[p.20]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Fig. 19. Inﬂuence of inertial biases oscillation band on body attitude NSE for scenario #2 (100 runs).
Fig. 20. Inﬂuence of inertial biases oscillation band on full gyroscope error for run #10 of scenario #1.
Table 11
Inﬂuence of inertial biases oscillation band on aggregated ﬁnal ground speed NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
Baseline
±300 · σu · t1/2
±1000 · σu · t1/2
ˆvN
END [m/s]
ˆvN
1 −vN
1
ˆvN
2 −vN
2
ˆvN
1 −vN
1
ˆvN
2 −vN
2
ˆvN
1 −vN
1
ˆvN
2 −vN
2
#1
mean
+0.325
+0.465
+0.325
+0.465
+0.325
+0.460
std
2.588
2.204
2.592
2.203
2.593
2.204
max
+9.321
+7.392
+9.336
+7.368
+9.293
+7.436
#2
mean
-0.083
-0.139
-0.084
-0.140
-0.085
-0.143
std
0.652
0.629
0.656
0.634
0.655
0.634
max
-1.916
-1.792
-1.906
-1.791
-1.897
-1.792
Table 12
Inﬂuence of inertial biases oscillation band on aggregated ﬁnal horizontal position NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
Baseline
±300 · σu · t1/2
±1000 · σu · t1/2
Distance [m]
ˆxHOR,END [m, %]
ˆxHOR,END [m, %]
ˆxHOR,END [m, %]
#1
mean
108622.6
7427.7
7.18
7423.5
7.18
7422.6
7.17
std
19935.3
4987.8
5.73
4997.0
5.73
5004.4
5.74
max
172842.3
25287.9
32.38
25291.9
32.32
25393.6
32.24
#2
mean
14198.4
215.6
1.52
217.0
1.53
217.1
1.53
std
1176.1
119.4
0.86
120.2
0.87
120.2
0.87
max
18253.0
586.3
4.38
586.2
4.38
586.2
4.38
continuous maneuvers with a constant wind ﬁeld. Although no 
data is shown, the inﬂuence on the vertical position estimation 
accuracy is also negligible.
The summary of this section is that the dependency of the re-
sults on the width of the band in which the inertial sensors bias 
drift oscillates is very small. The body attitude estimation results 
vary slightly but these changes are not signiﬁcant enough to im-
ply any changes in the horizontal velocity or position estimation 
accuracy.
Inﬂuence of gyroscope quality
This section analyzes the sensitivity on the GNSS-Denied navi-
gation results of employing gyroscopes of different quality or per-
formance grade than those of the baseline described in [3] and Ta-
ble 1. Table 13 shows the performances of the conﬁguration named 
“GYR Better” in the same format as that employed in section 4, 
which correspond to the high performance MEMS gyroscopes in-
side the Sensonor STIM300 IMU [83], and are better than those 
of the baseline. It also shows the performance parameters of two 
ﬁctitious gyroscopes that perform worse than the baseline. These 
conﬁgurations are named “GYR Worse” and “GYR Worst”, and their 
objective is to provide a wide range of gyroscope performances 
with which to evaluate the sensitivity of the navigation algorithms 
to the gyroscopes grade. Additionally, they represent a safety mea-
sure in case of errors in the modeling of the baseline gyroscopes 
performances.
Table 14, together with Figs. 21 and 22,25 show the aggregated 
body attitude NSE after one hundred runs of both scenarios with 
each of the three conﬁgurations described above, in addition to the 
25 Note that the baseline columns of Table 14 coincide with the right hand side of 
Table 4, and the blue lines of Figs. 21 and 22 coincide with those of Figs. 4 and 5, 
respectively.
20
[p.21]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Table 13
Performances of “GYR Better”, “GYR Worse”, and “GYR Worst” gyroscopes.
GYR Better
GYR Worse
GYR Worst
Error Source
Variable
Value
Unit
Value
Unit
Value
Unit
Bias Drift
σuGYR
1.38 · 10−5
◦/s1.5
5.00 · 10−4
◦/s1.5
1.50 · 10−3
◦/s1.5
System Noise
σvGYR
2.50 · 10−3
◦/s0.5
8.00 · 10−3
◦/s0.5
2.50 · 10−2
◦/s0.5
Scale Factor
sGYR
5.00 · 10−6
-
5.00 · 10−5
-
1.00 · 10−4
-
Cross Coupling
mGYR
1.50 · 10−5
-
1.50 · 10−4
-
4.50 · 10−4
-
Bias Offset
B0GYR
3.00 · 10−2
◦/s
7.50 · 10−1
◦/s
1.50 · 100
◦/s
Table 14
Inﬂuence of gyroscopes quality on aggregated body attitude NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
Baseline
GYR Better
GYR Worse
GYR Worst
∥ˆrB∥[◦]
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
#1
mean
0.152
0.078
0.52
0.147
0.075
0.50
0.184
0.105
0.63
0.346
0.224
1.17
std
0.072
0.021
0.15
0.072
0.022
0.16
0.066
0.022
0.13
0.059
0.037
0.17
max
0.448
0.168
1.32
0.450
0.169
1.35
0.452
0.189
1.23
0.532
0.319
1.70
#2
mean
0.118
0.074
0.38
0.105
0.069
0.35
0.152
0.094
0.47
0.291
0.177
0.80
std
0.023
0.015
0.07
0.020
0.016
0.07
0.035
0.021
0.10
0.081
0.055
0.19
max
0.206
0.124
0.63
0.147
0.129
0.63
0.283
0.158
0.78
0.574
0.383
1.53
Fig. 21. Inﬂuence of gyroscopes quality on body attitude NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Fig. 22. Inﬂuence of gyroscopes quality on body attitude NSE for scenario #2 (100 runs).
baseline. There exists a clear correlation between the body attitude
NSE and the quality or grade of the gyroscopes, but the proposed 
attitude ﬁlter algorithms manage in all four cases to obtain esti-
mations that are bounded and contain no drift.
Even taking into consideration that the algorithms are opti-
mized for the baseline conﬁguration (in particular, an adjustment 
of the attitude ﬁlter covariances would likely result in slight im-
provements for the non baseline conﬁgurations), it can be observed 
that there is little potential for improvement, while on the other 
side employing gyroscopes of lesser grade does result in a worse 
estimation of the body attitude. The small improvements obtained 
when employing gyroscopes that are signiﬁcantly better than those 
of the baseline is attributed to the limitations of GNSS-Denied nav-
igation in turbulent conditions, and in particular to the multiple 
inaccuracies present in the ﬁlter speciﬁc force observation equa-
tion (17) that prevent the tracking of the full accelerometer error 
EACC in GNSS-Denied conditions.
As the body attitude estimation is bounded and drift-less, the 
gyroscopes grade does not have any inﬂuence on the estimation 
accuracy of the ground velocity or the horizontal position. Al-
though not shown, and similarly to the case of the bias drift os-
cillation band analyzed in the previous section, the results for all 
four conﬁgurations are virtually the same in both scenarios. Note 
that this is the case even with the signiﬁcant differences of gy-
roscope quality considered (two orders of magnitude in bias drift 
from “GYR Better” to “GYR Worst”, and smaller but also signiﬁcant 
differences in all other parameters), and considering the differ-
ences in mission, weather, and wind between the two scenarios. 
The inﬂuence of the gyroscope grade on the vertical position esti-
mation accuracy is also negligible.
Inﬂuence of accelerometer quality
This section analyzes the sensitivity on the GNSS-Denied nav-
igation results of employing accelerometers of different quality or 
21
[p.22]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Table 15
Performances of “ACC Better”, “ACC Worse”, and “ACC Worst” accelerometers.
ACC Better
ACC Worse
ACC Worst
Error Source
Variable
Value
Unit
Value
Unit
Value
Unit
Bias Drift
σuACC
4.90 · 10−5
m/s2.5
8.50 · 10−5
m/s2.5
1.20 · 10−4
m/s2.5
System Noise
σvACC
3.30 · 10−4
m/s1.5
5.00 · 10−4
m/s1.5
6.50 · 10−4
m/s1.5
Scale Factor
sACC
1.50 · 10−5
-
8.50 · 10−5
-
1.40 · 10−4
-
Cross Coupling
mACC
1.50 · 10−5
-
5.00 · 10−5
-
9.50 · 10−5
-
Bias Offset
B0ACC
1.96 · 10−2
m/s2
4.50 · 10−1
m/s2
8.50 · 10−1
m/s2
Table 16
Inﬂuence of accelerometers quality on aggregated body attitude NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
Baseline
ACC Better
ACC Worse
ACC Worst
∥ˆrB∥[◦]
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
#1
mean
0.152
0.078
0.52
0.150
0.078
0.52
0.157
0.080
0.53
0.162
0.081
0.53
std
0.072
0.021
0.15
0.069
0.020
0.15
0.073
0.021
0.15
0.074
0.021
0.15
max
0.448
0.168
1.32
0.447
0.168
1.32
0.452
0.170
1.31
0.462
0.172
1.31
#2
mean
0.118
0.074
0.38
0.116
0.073
0.37
0.121
0.076
0.38
0.126
0.078
0.39
std
0.023
0.015
0.07
0.021
0.015
0.07
0.026
0.016
0.07
0.031
0.017
0.08
max
0.206
0.124
0.63
0.179
0.131
0.65
0.254
0.125
0.63
0.307
0.138
0.72
Fig. 23. Inﬂuence of accelerometers quality on body attitude NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
performance grade than those of the baseline described in [3]
and Table 1. Table 15 shows the performances of the conﬁgura-
tion named “ACC Better”, which correspond to the high perfor-
mance MEMS accelerometers inside the Sensonor STIM300 IMU
[83]. It also shows the performance parameters of two ﬁctitious 
accelerometers that perform worse than the baseline. These con-
ﬁgurations are named “ACC Worse” and “ACC Worst”, and their 
objective is to provide a wide range of accelerometer performances 
with which to evaluate the sensitivity of the navigation algorithms 
to the accelerometer grade. Additionally, they represent a safety 
measure in case of errors in the modeling of the baseline ac-
celerometers performances.
Table 16, together with Figs. 23 and 24,26 show the aggregated 
body attitude NSE after one hundred runs of both scenarios with 
each of the three conﬁgurations described above, in addition to the 
baseline. Although technically present, the dependency of the body 
attitude estimation accuracy with the grade of the accelerometers 
is so small than it can be considered nonexistent for all practical 
purposes.
The reason for this behavior lies on the low accuracy of the 
(17) attitude ﬁlter observations in GNSS-Denied conditions, which 
do not allow the navigation ﬁlter to track the full accelerometer er-
ror EACC. Discarding the air velocity and turbulence time derivatives 
viewed in the body frame (˙vB
TAS, ˙vB
TURB) as well as the wind time 
derivative viewed in NED (˙vN
WIND) is what provides the attitude ﬁl-
ter with relatively unbiased, albeit noisier, observations that enable 
it to track the body attitude without drift for long periods of time. 
Although not considered in the observation equation, these time 
26 Note that the baseline columns of Table 16 coincide with the right hand side of 
Table 4, and the blue lines of Figs. 23 and 24 coincide with those of Figs. 4 and 5, 
respectively.
derivatives exist and are included in the measurements. In particu-
lar, the wind turbulence accelerations considered in both scenarios 
are much higher than the effect of the accelerometers bias drift 
and system noise in all four accelerometer conﬁgurations. The ac-
celerometer grade hence would only play a meaningful role in the 
body attitude estimation results if ﬂying in very calm conditions 
with barely any turbulence or if their noise and drift levels were 
so high that they became comparable to the turbulence levels.
In this sense the neglected time derivatives within the navi-
gation ﬁlter speciﬁc force observation equation (17), of which the 
wind turbulence acceleration is by far the most signiﬁcant, can be 
considered as additional sources of error within the accelerometers 
with which to measure the speciﬁc force. If their oscillations are 
bigger than the accelerometers intrinsic errors, as is the case, then 
the effect of the later on the measurements is barely noticeable.
As explained in previous sections, the estimation of the ground 
velocity and horizontal position does not depend on the body at-
titude as long as the later is bounded and drift-less, which is the 
case in this analysis. No results are shown for the estimation of the 
ground velocity or horizontal position in either scenario because 
they are virtually identical for each of the four conﬁgurations. Note 
that this is the case even with the signiﬁcant differences of qual-
ity among the accelerometers considered (approximately an order 
of magnitude in most performance parameters between “ACC Bet-
ter” and “ACC Worst”), and taking into account the differences in 
mission, weather, and wind between the two scenarios. The inﬂu-
ence of the accelerometer grade on the vertical position estimation 
accuracy is also negligible.
Inﬂuence of magnetometer quality
This section analyzes the sensitivity on the GNSS-Denied navi-
gation results of employing magnetometers of different quality or 
22
[p.23]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Fig. 24. Inﬂuence of accelerometers quality on body attitude NSE for scenario #2 (100 runs).
Table 17
Performances of “MAG Better” and “MAG Worse” magnetometers.
MAG Better
MAG Worse
Error Source
Variable
Value
Unit
Value
Unit
System Noise
σv,MAG
3.00 · 100
nT · s0.5
1.00 · 101
nT · s0.5
Scale Factor & Soft Iron
sMAG
5.00 · 10−4
-
1.25 · 10−3
-
Cross Coupling & Soft Iron
mMAG
7.00 · 10−4
-
1.50 · 10−3
-
Hard Iron
BHI,MAG
1.25 · 102
nT
3.50 · 102
nT
Bias Offset
B0,MAG
3.00 · 102
nT
7.50 · 102
nT
Table 18
Inﬂuence of magnetometers quality on aggregated body attitude NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
Baseline
MAG Better
MAG Worse
∥ˆrB∥[◦]
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
#1
mean
0.152
0.078
0.521
0.134
0.075
0.499
0.203
0.087
0.579
std
0.072
0.021
0.151
0.060
0.019
0.141
0.120
0.030
0.191
max
0.448
0.168
1.321
0.452
0.170
1.274
0.855
0.263
1.453
#2
mean
0.118
0.074
0.376
0.112
0.072
0.367
0.138
0.082
0.411
std
0.023
0.015
0.069
0.022
0.014
0.069
0.029
0.020
0.078
max
0.206
0.124
0.632
0.198
0.122
0.617
0.227
0.138
0.676
performance grade than those of the baseline described in [3] and 
Table 2. Table 17 shows the performances of two ﬁctitious mag-
netometers with performances better (“MAG Better”) and worse 
(“MAG Worse”) than those of the baseline. As in previous sections, 
the objective is to obtain a suﬃciently wide range of magnetome-
ter performance grades with which to evaluate the sensitivity of 
the navigation results when executing both scenarios.
Table 18, together with Figs. 25 and 26,27 show the body at-
titude NSE for both scenarios in the same format as in previous 
sections for each of the two conﬁgurations described above, in 
addition to the baseline. There exists a clear correlation between 
the magnitude of the attitude estimation errors and the quality or 
grade of the magnetometers, but the proposed attitude ﬁlter al-
gorithms manage in all three cases to obtain estimations that are 
bounded and contain no drift.
Comparing these results with those obtained above when vary-
ing the grade of the gyroscopes, they are quite similar, in the sense 
that there is relatively little potential for improvement but signif-
icant downside to using magnetometers of inferior grade. This is 
attributed to the limitations of GNSS-Denied navigation in tur-
bulent conditions, and in particular to the multiple inaccuracies 
present in the ﬁlter speciﬁc force observation equation (17) that 
prevent the tracking of the full accelerometer error EACC in GNSS-
Denied conditions.
As in the gyroscopes case, the differences in body attitude esti-
mation accuracy are too small to have any inﬂuence on the accu-
racy of the ground velocity and horizontal positions. Although the 
27 Note that the baseline columns of Table 18 coincide with the right hand side of 
Table 4, and the blue lines of Figs. 25 and 26 coincide with those of Figs. 4 and 5, 
respectively.
results are not shown, they are virtually the same for all three con-
ﬁgurations in both scenarios. The inﬂuence of the magnetometer 
grade on the vertical position estimation accuracy is also negligi-
ble.
Inﬂuence of air velocity sensors quality
This section analyzes the inﬂuence on the navigation results 
of employing a Pitot tube and air vanes of different quality to 
those used in the baseline and described in [3] and Table 3. To do 
so, this analysis employs two different ﬁctitious settings, named 
“TAS-AOA-AOS Better” and “TAS-AOA-AOS Worse”, whose system 
noise and bias offsets are listed in Table 19. The former conﬁgura-
tion represents the performances of higher SWaP or better quality 
sensors, while the later may be more realistic for smaller platforms 
in which a lower SWaP system is required.
As previously explained, the air data ﬁlter is capable of mostly 
eliminating the system noise when estimating the components of 
the air velocity vector, but can not remove the bias offsets, which 
are incorporated into the estimations. These are biased on a tra-
jectory basis, zero mean when aggregated, and always bounded by 
the sensor quality. Table 20 validates these conclusions and shows 
progressively better results as the quality of the TAS, AOA, and
AOS sensors improves. Only the scenario #1 results are shown, as 
the behavior of the air data ﬁlter is similar on both scenarios.
The inﬂuence of the air velocity sensors quality on the body at-
titude for both scenarios is summarized in Table 21, together with 
Figs. 27 and 28.28 There is a clear correlation between the sensors 
28 Note that the baseline columns of Table 21 coincide with the right hand side of 
Table 4, and the blue lines of Figs. 27 and 28 coincide with those of Figs. 4 and 5, 
respectively.
23
[p.24]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Fig. 25. Inﬂuence of magnetometers quality on body attitude NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Fig. 26. Inﬂuence of magnetometers quality on body attitude NSE for scenario #2 (100 runs).
Table 19
Performances of “TAS-AOA-AOS Better” and “TAS-AOA-AOS Worse” air data systems.
TAS-AOA-AOS Better
TAS-AOA-AOS Worse
Error Source
Variable
Value
Unit
Value
Unit
Airspeed System Noise
σvTAS
1.50 · 10−1
m/s
6.66 · 10−1
m/s
Airspeed Bias Offset
B0TAS
1.50 · 10−1
m/s
6.66 · 10−1
m/s
Angle of Attack System Noise
σvAOA
1.00 · 10−1
◦
6.66 · 10−1
◦
Angle of Attack Bias Offset
B0AOA
1.00 · 10−1
◦
6.66 · 10−1
◦
Angle of Sideslip System Noise
σvAOS
1.00 · 10−1
◦
6.66 · 10−1
◦
Angle of Sideslip Bias Offset
B0AOS
1.00 · 10−1
◦
6.66 · 10−1
◦
Table 20
Inﬂuence of air velocity sensor quality on aggregated air velocity vector NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Scenario #1
Baseline
TAS-AOA-AOS Better
TAS-AOA-AOS Worse
ˆvTAS −vTAS

10−1 · m/s

mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
-0.30
0.78
5.78
-0.14
0.53
3.41
-0.45
0.96
7.79
std
3.01
0.01
1.78
1.36
0.00
0.80
4.52
0.01
2.68
max
-7.74
0.80
-11.07
-3.49
0.55
-5.87
-11.63
1.00
-16.18
ˆα −α

10−1·◦
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
+0.32
0.94
6.83
+0.14
0.66
4.18
+0.48
1.17
9.13
std
3.25
0.04
2.02
1.46
0.04
0.90
4.88
0.03
2.99
max
-8.39
1.04
+12.44
-3.78
0.76
+7.17
-12.59
1.26
+17.74
ˆβ −β

10−1·◦
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
-0.25
1.75
10.47
-0.11
1.08
6.02
-0.38
2.23
13.95
std
3.35
0.24
2.07
1.51
0.07
0.91
5.03
0.67
4.27
max
+8.66
3.02
+15.92
+3.90
1.37
+8.50
+13.00
6.85
+39.49
24
[p.25]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Table 21
Inﬂuence of air speed sensor quality on aggregated body attitude NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
Baseline
TAS-AOA-AOS Better
TAS-AOA-AOS Worse
∥ˆrB∥[◦]
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
#1
mean
0.152
0.078
0.521
0.144
0.076
0.505
0.158
0.080
0.532
std
0.072
0.021
0.151
0.056
0.017
0.135
0.084
0.026
0.165
max
0.448
0.168
1.321
0.364
0.138
1.319
0.504
0.205
1.296
#2
mean
0.118
0.074
0.376
0.113
0.070
0.365
0.124
0.079
0.396
std
0.023
0.015
0.069
0.021
0.014
0.066
0.027
0.018
0.080
max
0.206
0.124
0.632
0.188
0.110
0.562
0.224
0.135
0.681
Fig. 27. Inﬂuence of air speed sensor quality on body attitude NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Fig. 28. Inﬂuence of air speed sensor quality on body attitude NSE for scenario #2 (100 runs).
quality and the aggregated body attitude NSE, which is caused by 
the accuracy of the attitude ﬁlter observations, in particular those 
of pn (14).
The inﬂuence of the Pitot tube and air vanes quality on the 
ground velocity estimation is shown in Table 22.29 It is small for 
scenario #1, in which the effects of the air velocity vector are 
masked by the much bigger inﬂuence of the wind change from 
the time the GNSS signals are lost, but signiﬁcant for scenario #2, 
in which the wind remains constant throughout the trajectory. In 
any case, this behavior is different to that obtained when vary-
ing the quality of gyroscopes, accelerometers, and magnetometers 
in previous sections, and the reason lies in the use of ˆvN
TAS for the 
estimation of the ground velocity ˆvN in the position ﬁlter. The in-
ﬂuence of both ˆvB
TAS and ˆqNB, which together make up ˆvN
TAS, is rather 
small because of the back and forth compensation performed by 
the position ﬁlter when it loses the GNSS signals, but small errors 
in ˆvB
TAS have a bigger inﬂuence in ˆvN
TAS than those of ˆqNB, specially 
in the case of pitch and roll where the angles are very small. For 
this reason, improvements on the body attitude estimation ˆqNB by 
themselves do not imply any noticeable change in the estimation 
of the ground velocity, as shown in previous sections, while when 
combined with improvements in the air velocity vector estimation 
ˆvB
TAS, improvements in the aggregated ground velocity NSE become 
noticeable.
29 Note that the baseline columns of Table 22 coincide with those of Table 6.
Table 23, together with Figs. 29 and 3030 show the inﬂuence 
of the quality of the air velocity sensors on the ﬁnal aggregated 
horizontal position NSE. The slight changes in ground velocity es-
timation accuracy are integrated and translate into small changes 
in the accuracy of the horizontal position estimation, although 
they are small when compared to the inﬂuence of the wind speed 
changes since the time the GNSS signals are lost. Although no data 
is shown, the inﬂuence of the air velocity sensors on the vertical 
position estimation accuracy is negligible.
Inﬂuence of atmospheric sensors quality
This section analyzes the inﬂuence on the navigation results 
of employing atmospheric sensors (barometer and thermometer) 
of different quality to those used in the baseline conﬁguration 
and described in [3] and Table 3. As neither the body attitude 
nor the horizontal position estimation errors depend on the qual-
ity of these sensors, this analysis employs two different ﬁctitious 
settings, named “OSP-OAT Worse” and “OSP-OAT Worst”, whose 
system noise and bias offsets are listed in Table 24, with the ob-
jective of determining if the lack of inﬂuence is also the case with 
sensors signiﬁcantly worse than those employed in the baseline 
conﬁguration.
30 Note that the baseline columns of Table 23 can also be found in Table 7, while 
the blue lines of Figs. 29 and 30 are the same as those of Figs. 10 and 11, respec-
tively.
25
[p.26]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Table 22
Inﬂuence of air speed sensor quality on ﬁnal aggregated ground speed NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
Baseline
TAS-AOA-AOS Better
TAS-AOA-AOS Worse
ˆvN
END [m/s]
ˆvN
1 −vN
1
ˆvN
2 −vN
2
ˆvN
1 −vN
1
ˆvN
2 −vN
2
ˆvN
1 −vN
1
ˆvN
2 −vN
2
#1
mean
+0.325
+0.465
+0.335
+0.477
+0.311
+0.450
std
2.588
2.204
2.582
2.163
2.601
2.253
max
+9.321
+7.392
+9.132
+7.568
+9.448
+7.267
#2
mean
-0.083
-0.139
-0.047
-0.102
-0.114
-0.165
std
0.652
0.629
0.570
0.575
0.771
0.721
max
-1.916
-1.792
-1.497
+1.404
+2.357
-2.163
Table 23
Inﬂuence of air speed sensor quality on ﬁnal aggregated horizontal position NSE (100 runs).
Scenario
Baseline
TAS-AOA-AOS Better
TAS-AOA-AOS Worse
Distance [m]
ˆxHOR,END [m, %]
ˆxHOR,END [m, %]
ˆxHOR,END [m, %]
#1
mean
108622.6
7427.7
7.18
7291.2
7.05
7667.0
7.41
std
19935.3
4987.8
5.73
4913.1
5.65
5030.5
5.70
max
172842.3
25287.9
32.38
25291.8
31.30
25320.0
33.39
#2
mean
14198.4
215.6
1.52
198.0
1.40
245.6
1.74
std
1176.1
119.4
0.86
105.8
0.75
137.0
1.00
max
18253.0
586.3
4.38
513.2
3.65
672.4
5.33
Fig. 29. Inﬂuence of air speed sensor quality on horizontal position NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Fig. 30. Inﬂuence of air speed sensor quality on horizontal position NSE for scenario #2 (100 runs).
Table 24
Performances of “OSP-OAT Worse” and “OSP-OAT Worst” atmospheric sensors.
OSP-OAT Worse
OSP-OAT Worst
Error Source
Variable
Value
Unit
Value
Unit
Pressure System Noise
σvOSP
1.50 · 10+2
Pa
3.00 · 10+2
Pa
Pressure Bias Offset
B0OSP
1.50 · 10+2
Pa
3.00 · 10+2
Pa
Temperature System Noise
σvOAT
1.50 · 10−1
K
5.00 · 10−1
K
Temperature Bias Offset
B0OAT
1.50 · 10−1
K
5.00 · 10−1
K
26
[p.27]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
Table 25
Inﬂuence of atmospheric sensors quality on aggregated T, HP, and T NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Aggregated Errors
Baseline
OSP-OAT Worse
OSP-OAT Worst
ˆT −T

10−1 · K

mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
-0.06
0.16
1.14
-0.17
0.27
2.48
-0.58
0.50
6.30
std
0.51
0.00
0.30
1.52
0.00
0.90
5.07
0.00
3.00
max
-1.52
0.16
-2.21
-4.56
0.28
-5.70
-15.20
0.51
-17.26
ˆHP −HP [m]
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
+0.97
0.93
12.92
+1.45
1.29
18.91
+2.88
2.26
36.33
std
11.26
0.05
6.73
16.89
0.07
10.13
33.77
0.16
20.27
max
+29.60
1.11
+33.59
+44.37
1.57
+50.00
+88.54
2.86
+98.82
ˆT −T

10−1 · K

mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
+0.01
0.17
1.52
-0.08
0.29
2.85
-0.39
0.52
6.82
std
0.92
0.00
0.56
1.94
0.00
1.16
5.66
0.01
3.38
max
-2.59
0.17
-3.34
-6.16
0.29
-7.35
-18.40
0.54
-20.61
Table 26
Inﬂuence of atmospheric sensors quality on aggregated body attitude NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
Scenario
Baseline
OSP-OAT Worse
OSP-OAT Worst
∥ˆrB∥[◦]
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max
#1
mean
0.152
0.078
0.521
0.153
0.079
0.523
0.156
0.080
0.530
std
0.072
0.021
0.151
0.072
0.021
0.151
0.072
0.021
0.150
max
0.448
0.168
1.321
0.448
0.169
1.313
0.450
0.170
1.295
Table 27
Inﬂuence of atmospheric sensors quality on aggregated vertical position
NSE for scenario #1 (100 runs).
ˆhEND [m]
Baseline
OSP-OAT Worse
OSP-OAT Worst
#1
mean
-3.89
-3.87
-4.01
std
26.03
26.01
26.07
max
-70.49
-69.75
-68.00
As explained above, the air data ﬁlter is capable of mostly elim-
inating the system noise when estimating the pressure altitude 
and the atmospheric temperature, but can not remove the bias 
offsets, which are incorporated into the estimations. These are bi-
ased on a trajectory basis, zero mean when aggregated, and always 
bounded by the sensor quality. Table 25 validates these conclusions 
for scenario #1 and shows progressively worse results as the qual-
ity of the OSP and OAT sensors diminishes. A similar conclusion 
can be applied to the temperature offset estimation ˆT, which is 
just a combination of the previous two (9) and hence shows the 
same dependencies. Only the scenario #1 results are shown, as the 
behavior of the air data ﬁlter is similar on both scenarios.
The body attitude estimation is for all practical purposes in-
dependent of the atmospheric sensors quality, as shown in Ta-
ble 26.31 Although no data is shown, the inﬂuence on the ground 
velocity and horizontal position estimation accuracy is negligible.
The previous analysis indicates that the vertical position esti-
mation error depends on two factors: the ionospheric errors and 
the change in pressure offset p from the time the GNSS signals 
are lost. The results obtained with different atmospheric sensors, 
shown in Table 27, validate these conclusions as they do not show 
any inﬂuence on the accuracy of the vertical position estimations.
9. Summary of results
This article proposes an INS that takes advantage of sen-
sors such as magnetometers, Pitot tube, and air vanes, already 
present in autonomous ﬁxed wing low SWaP aircraft, to improve 
their GNSS-Denied navigation capabilities, facilitating the fusion 
between the inertial ﬁlter and visual odometry algorithms. The 
results obtained when applying the proposed algorithms to high 
31 Note that the baseline columns of Table 26 coincide with the right hand side of 
Table 4.
ﬁdelity Monte Carlo simulations of two scenarios representative of 
the challenges of GNSS-Denied navigation indicate the following:
• The body attitude estimation shows no drift with time. It is 
lightly biased for each trajectory (for each Euler angle as well 
as for the total attitude error); when aggregated for multiple 
executions, the estimation is unbiased (zero mean) for each 
Euler angle and biased for the total error. The aggregated er-
rors are highly repeatable and can be considered bounded. 
There is no need for maneuvers, and the existing ones do not 
introduce error spikes. The aircraft can hence remain aloft in
GNSS-Denied conditions for as long as it has fuel.
• The vertical position estimation shows an error that depends 
on two factors: the ionospheric effects (which also apply when
GNSS signals are available) and the change in atmospheric 
pressure offset p from its value at the time the GNSS signals 
are lost. Both factors are random and hence the ﬁnal error is 
unbiased (zero mean) when aggregated; both factors are also 
bounded by atmospheric physics, and hence so is the estima-
tion error. The estimation shows no drift with time and the 
magnitude of the bounded error indicates it is valid for all 
navigation purposes except landing.
• The ground velocity estimation shows an error that mostly de-
pends on the wind change from its value at the time the GNSS
signals are lost. Air velocity and body attitude estimation ac-
curacy also play a minor role. The three factors are random 
and hence the ﬁnal error is unbiased (zero mean) when ag-
gregated. The wind change is bounded by atmospheric physics, 
while the air velocity and body attitude errors are bounded by 
sensor quality; the estimation error hence is also bounded. The 
estimation shows no drift with time.
• The horizontal position estimation exhibits a drift with time 
that depends exclusively on the ground velocity estimation er-
ror; when this error is constant, the drift is linear with time. 
The drift results in an unbounded error that is not valid for 
navigation purposes due to excessive collision risk.
When comparing the GNSS-Denied navigation results obtained 
with the proposed ﬁlter against those resulting from more tradi-
tional approaches to inertial navigation designed to rely on velocity 
and position observations provided by the GNSS receiver that sud-
denly are not present, there are signiﬁcant improvements in the 
estimation of body attitude (specially during maneuvers), vertical 
27
[p.28]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
position (where drift with time is replaced by a bounded error), 
and horizontal position (where the pace of drift or error growth 
with time is drastically reduced). The following observations can 
be made:
• The proposed approach of freezing the wind speed estimation
ˆvN
WIND at its value when the GNSS signals are lost is the pre-
ferred choice for reducing horizontal position errors as it relies 
on a single integration. Alternative approaches using a double 
integration may be superior for the ﬁrst few minutes of GNSS-
Denied conditions, but overall result in a much faster growth 
of the horizontal position error with time.
• The proposed approach of employing the pressure altitude es-
timation and freezing the atmospheric pressure offset estima-
tion ˆp at its value when the GNSS signals are lost is the 
preferred choice for reducing vertical position errors as it does 
not rely on any integrations. Alternative approaches require at 
least one integration and result in unbounded estimation er-
rors that grow with time.
• The proposed approach of discarding the air velocity and tur-
bulence time derivatives viewed in the body frame (˙vB
TAS = 0, 
˙vB
TURB = 0) as well as the wind ﬁeld time derivative viewed in
NED (˙vN
WIND = 0) is the preferred choice for reducing body atti-
tude estimation errors, specially during maneuvers. Alternative 
approaches are more sensitive to the lack of absolute velocity 
observations in GNSS-Denied conditions and result in signiﬁ-
cant attitude estimation errors when maneuvering.
A sensitivity analysis of the inﬂuence of the GNSS-Denied nav-
igation results with respect to the quality or grade of the onboard 
sensors proves that the above results are generic and not speciﬁc 
to certain sensor performance parameters. The main conclusions 
are the following:
• The vertical position estimation error is independent of the 
quality of all sensors and depends exclusively on ionospheric 
effects and the pressure offset change since the time the GNSS
signals are lost.
• The horizontal position estimation error shows a slight de-
pendency on the quality of the Pitot tube and air vanes, but 
not that of any other sensor. It depends mostly on the wind 
change since the time the GNSS signals are lost.
• The body attitude estimation error depends on the quality 
of gyroscopes, magnetometers, Pitot tube, and air vanes, but 
not that of accelerometers and air data sensors. Taking the 
baseline as reference, there is little potential for improvement, 
but a clear correlation between lower sensor grade and higher 
errors. Its bounded nature however is independent of sensor 
grade. Note that body attitude estimation accuracy is key for 
the fusion between inertial and visual odometry algorithms.
10. Conclusions
The proposed inertial navigation ﬁlter, speciﬁcally designed for 
the challenges faced by autonomous ﬁxed wing aircraft that en-
counter GNSS-Denied conditions, possesses signiﬁcant advantages 
that increase the possibilities of the platform successfully reaching 
the vicinity of a recovery location from where it can be landed by 
remote control. Additionally, it facilitates the fusion between iner-
tial and visual navigation techniques to further improve the aircraft
GNSS-Denied navigation capabilities. The ﬁlter obtains bounded 
estimations for attitude, vertical position, and horizontal velocity, 
whose integration results in a horizontal position estimation drift. 
High ﬁdelity Monte Carlo simulations highlight the beneﬁts of the 
proposed ﬁlter when compared with inertial solutions that sud-
denly can not employ the GNSS signals on which they rely. The 
quantitative performance of the proposed ﬁlter shows a slight de-
pendence on the quality or grade of the onboard sensors, but it is 
qualitatively valid for a wide range of sensor grades.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Time derivative of the aircraft velocity
This appendix derives expressions for the time derivative of the 
aircraft ground velocity (57), (58) that form the basis for the es-
tablishment of the attitude ﬁlter equations in section 5. Although 
the resulting equations can be found in various aircraft navigation 
text books [7,84,85] and articles [86], specifying the origin of the 
different terms facilitates the understanding of the simpliﬁcations 
performed in section 5 as well as the different choices discussed 
in section 7.
Considering an inertial frame FI centered at the Earth center of 
mass with axes that do not rotate with respect to any star other 
than the Sun, the Earth Centered Earth Fixed (ECEF) frame FE, and 
the body frame FB centered at the aircraft center of mass, the rela-
tive displacements among its origins can be directly established32:
xI
IB = xI
IE + xI
EB = xI
EB = RIE xE
EB
(46)
The linear velocity can be obtained by time derivating and em-
ploying the relationship between the rotation matrix and its time 
derivative [79,81]:
˙xI
IB = ˙RIE xE
EB + RIE ˙xE
EB = RIE ωE
IE xE
EB + RIE ˙xE
EB
−→vI
IB = RIE ωE
IE xE
EB + RIE vE
EB
(47)
The process is repeated to obtain the linear acceleration33:
˙vI
IB = ˙RIE ωE
IE xE
EB + RIE ˙ω
E
IE xE
EB + RIE ωE
IE ˙xE
EB + ˙RIE vE
EB + RIE ˙vE
EB
(48)
aI
IB = RIE ωE
IE ωE
IE xE
EB + RIE ωE
IE vE
EB + RIE ωE
IE vE
EB + RIE aE
EB
= aI
EB + ωI
IE ωI
IE xI
EB + 2ωI
IE vI
EB
(49)
The ﬁrst term at the right hand side of (49) is the linear ac-
celeration aI
EB, which is the time derivative of the aircraft absolute 
velocity vEB viewed in the inertial frame. Making use of relation-
ship between the rotation matrix and its time derivative [79,81], 
it can be converted into a function of the aircraft and motion an-
gular velocities (ωEB = ωNB + ωEN) and the aircraft absolute velocity 
v = vEB:
aI
EB = RIE aE
EB = RIE ˙vE
EB = RIE
d

REB vB
EB
	
dt
= RIE
˙REB vB
EB + REB ˙vB
EB
	
= RIB
ωB
EB vB
EB + ˙vB
EB
	
−→aB
EB = ωB
EB vB
EB + ˙vB
EB = ωB
EB vB + ˙vB
(50)
Noting that vEB = vEN = v, the same process can be repeated re-
placing the FB body frame by the NED frame (FN):
aI
EB = RIE aE
EB = RIE ˙vE
EB = RIE ˙vE
EN
= RIE
d

REN vN
EN
	
dt
= RIE
˙REN vN
EN + REN ˙vN
EN
	
= RIN
ωN
EN vN
EN + ˙vN
EN
	
−→aN
EB = ωN
EN vN
EN + ˙vN
EN = ωN
EN vN + ˙vN
(51)
32 xI
IE = 0 as the origins of FI and FE coincide.
33 αIE = ˙ωIE = 0 as the Earth rotation velocity is constant.
28
[p.29]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
The second term of (49), called the transport acceleration atrs, 
is in fact the centripetal acceleration caused by the Earth rotation 
around its symmetry axis, this is, it is the opposite of the centrifu-
gal acceleration ac. Its NED form aN
trs can be directly obtained from 
the Earth angular velocity and the aircraft coordinates, where ϕ is 
the latitude, h the altitude over the WGS84 ellipsoid, and N is the 
radius of curvature of the prime vertical:
aN
trs = −aN
c = ωN
IE ωN
IE xN
EB
=

ω2
E (N + h) sinϕ cosϕ, 0, ω2
E (N + h) cos2 ϕ

T
(52)
The third term of (49) is called the Coriolis acceleration acor. Its
NED form aN
cor can also be obtained from the Earth angular velocity 
ωIE and the aircraft absolute velocity vEB = v:
aN
cor = 2ωN
IE vN
EB
=

2ωE vN
2 sinϕ, 2ωE

−vN
1 sinϕ −vN
3 cosϕ
	
, 2ωE vN
2 cosϕ
T
(53)
The application of Newton’s 2nd law to the motion of the air-
craft represented by its body frame results in

FI = d(m vIB)I
dt
= m ˙vI
IB = m aI
IB
(54)
where the mass variation with time is considered slow enough as 
to be quasi stationary. The introduction of the previous terms into 
(54) while converting to FB or FN results in (55) and (56), where 
FAER and FPRO are the aircraft aerodynamic and propulsive forces, 
while g represents the gravitational acceleration:

FB = RBI

FI = FB
AER + FB
PRO + m q∗
NB ⊗gN ⊗qNB
= m
ωB
EB vB + ˙vB + q∗
NB ⊗aN
trs ⊗qNB + q∗
NB ⊗aN
cor ⊗qNB
	
(55)

FN = RNI

FI = qNB ⊗

FB
AER + FB
PRO
	
⊗q∗
NB + m gN
= m
ωN
EN vN + ˙vN + aN
trs + aN
cor
	
(56)
As the gravity acceleration combines the gravitational and cen-
trifugal accelerations (gc = g + ac = g −atrs) and vEB = vEN = v, the 
ﬁnal expressions for the time derivative of the aircraft linear ve-
locity are the following:
˙vB = FB
AER + FB
PRO
m
−ωB
EB vB + q∗
NB ⊗

gN
c −aN
cor
	
⊗qNB
(57)
˙vN = qNB ⊗FB
AER + FB
PRO
m
⊗q∗
NB −ωN
EN vN + gN
c −aN
cor
(58)
References
[1] E. Gallo, High ﬁdelity ﬂight simulation for an autonomous low SWaP 
ﬁxed wing UAV in GNSS-denied conditions, https://github .com /edugallogithub /
gnssdenied _ﬂight _simulation, 2020, C++ open source code.
[2] E. Gallo, Stochastic high ﬁdelity simulation and scenarios for testing of ﬁxed 
wing autonomous GNSS-Denied navigation algorithms, arXiv:2102 .00883, 2021.
[3] E. Gallo, Customizable stochastic high ﬁdelity model of the sensors and camera 
onboard a low SWaP ﬁxed wing autonomous aircraft, arXiv:2102 .06492, 2021.
[4] M. Hassanalian, A. Abdelkeﬁ, Classiﬁcations, applications, and design challenges 
of drones: a review, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. (2017).
[5] S. Bijjahalli, R. Sabatini, A. Gardi, Advances in intelligent and autonomous nav-
igation systems for small UAS, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. (2020).
[6] J.A. Farrell, Aided Navigation, GPS with High Rate Sensors, Electronic Engineer-
ing Series, McGraw-Hill, 2008.
[7] P.D. Groves, Principles of GNSS, Inertial, and Multisensor Integrated Navigation 
Systems, GNSS Technology and Application Series, Artech House, 2008.
[8] A.B. Chatﬁeld, Fundamentals of High Accuracy Inertial Navigation, Progress in 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, vol. 174, American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics, 1997.
[9] M. Elbanhawi, A. Mohamed, R. Clothier, J. Palmer, M. Simic, S. Watkins, En-
abling technologies for autonomous MAV operations, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. (2017).
[10] R. Sabatini, T. Moore, S. Ramasamy, Global navigation satellite systems per-
formance analysis and augmentation strategies in aviation, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 
(2017).
[11] S. Thombre, M.Z.H. Bhuiyan, P. Eliardsson, B. Gabrielsson, M. Pattison, M. 
Dumville, D. Fryganiotis, S. Hill, V. Manikundalam, M. Poloskey, S. Lee, L. Ruot-
salainen, S. Soderholm, H. Kuusniemi, GNSS threat monitoring and reporting: 
past, present, and a proposed future, J. Navig. (2018).
[12] G. Zhang, L.-T. Hsu, Intelligent GNSS/INS integrated navigation system for a 
commercial UAV ﬂight control system, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. (2018).
[13] C. Tippitt, A. Schultz, W. Procino, Vehicle Navigation: Autonomy Through GPS-
Enabled and GPS-Denied Environments, state of the art report DSIAC-2020-
1328, Defense Systems Information Analysis Center, December 2020.
[14] X. Ma, S.M. Djouadi, P. Crilly, S. Smith, Navigation strategy with the aid of the 
theater positioning system, Intell. Syst. Control Autom. (2013).
[15] X. Ma, S.M. Djouadi, S. Sahyoun, P. Crilly, Navigation in GPS-Denied environ-
ments, in: 14thInternational Conference on Information Fusion, 2011.
[16] S.F. Smith, M. Bobrek, C. Jin, M.R. Moore, Design of an agile radionavigation 
system using SDR techniques, in: Proceedings of IEEE Milcom, Atlantic City, 
2005.
[17] C. Kim, H. So, T. Lee, C. Kee, A pseudolite based positioning system for legacy 
GNSS receivers, Sensors (2014).
[18] H. Kuusniemi, M.Z.H. Bhuiyan, M. Strom, S. Soderholm, T. Jokitalo, L. Chen, R. 
Chen, Utilizing Pulsed Pseudolites and High Sensitivity GNSS for Ubiquitous 
Outdoor/Indoor Satellite Navigation, 2012.
[19] C. O’Driscoll, D. Borio, J. Fortuny, Scoping Study of Pseudolites, tech. rep., JRC 
European Commission, 2013.
[20] J. Wang, Pseudolite applications in positioning and navigation: progress and 
problems, J. Glob. Position. Syst. (2002).
[21] R. Kapoor, S. Ramasamy, A. Gardi, R. Sabatini, UAV navigation using signals of 
opportunity in urban environments: a review, Energy Proc. (2017).
[22] A. Coluccia, F. Ricciato, G. Ricci, Positioning based on signals of opportunity, 
IEEE Commun. Lett. (2014).
[23] S.T. Goh, O. Abdelkhalik, S.A. Zekavat, A weighted measurement fusion Kalman 
ﬁlter implementation for UAV navigation, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. (2013).
[24] L. Zheng, R. Xue, Signals of opportunity navigation methods for complex lower 
airspace ﬂight, in: IEEE 5thInternational Conference on Cybernetics and Intelli-
gent Systems, CIS, 2011.
[25] T. White, J. Wheeler, C. Lindstrom, R. Christensen, K.R. Moon, GPS-Denied nav-
igation using SAR images and neural networks, arXiv:2010 .12108v1, 2020.
[26] Z. Sjanic, F. Gustafsson, Simultaneous navigation and synthetic aperture radar 
focusing, IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. (2015).
[27] D.O. Nitti, F. Bovenga, M.T. Chiaradia, M. Greco, G. Pinelli, Feasibility of using 
synthetic aperture radar to aid UAV navigation, Sensors (2015).
[28] G. Csaba, L. Somlyai, Z. Vamossy, Mobil robot navigation using 2D LIDAR, in: 
IEEE 16thWorld Symposium on Applied Machine Intelligence and Informatics, 
SAMI, 2018.
[29] G. Hemann, S. Singh, M. Kaess, Long range GPS-denied aerial inertial navigation 
with LIDAR localization, in: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent 
Robots and Systems, iROS, 2016.
[30] M.M. Miller, A. Soloviev, M.U. de Haag, M. Veth, J. Raquet, T.J. Klausutis, J.E. 
Touma, Navigation in GPS Denied Environments: Feature-Aided Inertial Sys-
tems, Tech. Rep. RTO-EN-SET-116, NATO, 2010.
[31] H. Goforth, S. Lucey, GPS-Denied UAV localization using pre existing satellite 
imagery, in: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, IEEE, 
2019.
[32] N. Ziaei, Geolocation of an aircraft using image registration coupling modes for 
autonomous navigation, arXiv:1909 .02875, 2019.
[33] T. Wang, Augmented UAS navigation in GPS denied terrain environments us-
ing synthetic vision, Iowa State University Graduate Theses and Dissertations 
15835 (2018).
[34] M.D. Pritt, K.J. LaTourette, Aircraft navigation by means of image registration, 
in: IEEE Applied Imagery Pattern Recognition Workshop, AIPR, 2013.
[35] H. Shen, Q. Zong, H. Lu, X. Zhang, B. Tian, L. He, A distributed approach for LI-
DAR based relative state estimation of multi UAV in GPS Denied environments, 
Chin. J. Aeronaut. (2021).
[36] B. Gong, S. Wang, M. Hao, X. Guan, S. Li, Range based collaborative relative 
navigation for multiple unmanned aerial vehicles using consensus extended 
Kalman ﬁlter, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. (2021).
[37] V.O. Sivaneri, J.N. Gross, UGV to UAV cooperative ranging for robust navigation 
in GNSS challenged environments, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. (2017).
[38] H.-F. Dai, H.-W. Bian, R.-Y. Wang, H. Ma, An INS/GNSS integrated navigation 
in GNSS Denied environment using recurrent neural network, Def. Technol. 
(2019).
[39] A. Assad, W. Khalaf, I. Chouaib, Radial basis function Kalman ﬁlter for attitude 
estimation in GPS-Denied environment, IET Radar Sonar Navig. (2019).
[40] M. Alnuaimi, M.G. Perhinschi, Alternative approaches for UAV dead reckoning 
based on the immunity paradigm, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. (2019).
[41] D. Scaramuzza, F. Fraundorfer, Visual odometry Part 1: The ﬁrst 30 years and 
fundamentals, IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. (2011).
29
[p.30]
E. Gallo and A. Barrientos
Aerospace Science and Technology 120 (2022) 107237
[42] F. Fraundorfer, D. Scaramuzza, Visual odometry Part 2: Matching, robustness, 
optimization, and applications, IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. (2012).
[43] D. Scaramuzza, Tutorial on Visual Odometry, Robotics & Perception Group, Uni-
versity of Zurich, 2012.
[44] D. Scaramuzza, Visual Odometry and SLAM: Past, Present, and the Robust Per-
ception Age, Robotics & Perception Group, University of Zurich, 2017.
[45] C. Cadena, L. Carlone, H. Carrillo, Y. Latif, D. Scaramuzza, J. Neira, I. Reid, J.J. 
Leonard, Past, present, and future of simultaneous localization and mapping: 
towards the robust perception age, IEEE Trans. Robot. (2016).
[46] C. Forster, M. Pizzoli, D. Scaramuzza, SVO: fast semi-direct monocular visual 
odometry, in: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, IEEE, 
2014.
[47] C. Forster, Z. Zhang, M. Gassner, M. Werlberger, D. Scaramuzza, SVO: semidirect 
visual odometry for monocular and multicamera systems, IEEE Trans. Robot. 
(2016).
[48] J. Engel, V. Koltun, D. Cremers, Direct sparse odometry, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. 
Mach. Intell. (2018).
[49] J. Engel, T. Schops, D. Cremers, LSD-SLAM: large scale direct monocular SLAM, 
in: European Conference on Computer Vision, 2014.
[50] R. Mur-Artal, J.M.M. Montiel, J.D. Tardos, ORB-SLAM: a versatile and accurate 
monocular SLAM system, IEEE Trans. Robot. (2015).
[51] R. Mur-Artal, J.D. Tardos, ORB-SLAM2: an open-source SLAM system for monoc-
ular, stereo, and RGB-d cameras, IEEE Trans. Robot. (2017).
[52] R. Mur-Artal, Real-Time Accurate Visual SLAM with Place Recognition, PhD the-
sis, University of Zaragoza, 2017.
[53] S. Abujoub, J. McPhee, R.A. Irani, Methodologies for landing autonomous aerial 
vehicles on maritime vessels, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. (2020).
[54] Y. Meng, W. Wang, H. Han, J. Ban, A visual inertial integrated landing guidance 
method for UAV landing on the ship, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. (2019).
[55] C. Chen, S. Chen, G. Hu, B. Chen, P. Chen, K. Su, An auto landing strategy based 
on pan tilt based visual servoing for unmanned aerial vehicle in GNSS denied 
environments, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. (2021).
[56] D. Scaramuzza, Z. Zhang, Visual inertial odometry of aerial robots, arXiv:1906 .
03289, 2019.
[57] L. von Stumberg, V. Usenko, D. Cremers, A review and quantitative evaluation 
of direct visual inertial odometry, in: M.Y. Yang, B. Rosenhahn, V. Murino (Eds.), 
Multimodal Scene Understanding, Academic Press, 2019, Chapter 7.
[58] C. Forster, Visual Inertial Odometry and Dense Reconstruction for Mobile 
Robots, PhD thesis, University of Zurich, 2016.
[59] C. Forster, L. Carlone, F. Dellaert, D. Scaramuzza, On manifold pre integration 
for real time visual inertial odometry, IEEE Trans. Robot. (2016).
[60] H. Deng, U. Arif, K. Yang, Z. Xi, Q. Quan, K.-Y. Cai, Global optical ﬂow based 
estimation of velocity for multicopters using monocular vision in GPS denied 
environments, Optik (2020).
[61] J. Delmerico, D. Scaramuzza, A benchmark comparison of monocular visual-
inertial odometry algorithms for ﬂying robots, in: IEEE International Conference 
on Robotics and Automation, IEEE, 2018.
[62] J.L. Crassidis, F.L. Markley, Unscented ﬁltering for spacecraft attitude estimation, 
J. Guid. Control Dyn. (2003).
[63] H.F. Grip, T.I. Fossen, T.A. Johansen, A. Saberi, Attitude estimation using biased 
gyro and vector measurements with time varying reference vectors, IEEE Trans. 
Autom. Control (2012).
[64] R. Kottah, P. Narkhede, V. Kumar, V. Karar, S. Poddar, Multiple model adaptive 
complementary ﬁlter for attitude estimation, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. (2017).
[65] H.A. Hashim, Systematic convergence of nonlinear stochastic estimators on the 
special orthogonal group SO(3), Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Control (2020).
[66] H.A. Hashim, L.J. Brown, K. McIsaac, Nonlinear stochastic attitude ﬁlters on the 
special orthogonal group SO(3): Ito and Stratonovich, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cy-
bern. (2019).
[67] P. Batista, C. Silvestre, P. Oliveira, On the observability of linear motion quanti-
ties in navigation systems, Syst. Control Lett. (2011).
[68] H.A. Hashim, L.J. Brown, K. McIsaac, Nonlinear pose ﬁlters on the special Eu-
clidean group SE(3) with guaranteed transient and steady state performance, 
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. (2019).
[69] H.A. Hashim, GPS denied navigation: attitude, position, linear velocity, and 
gravity estimation with nonlinear stochastic observer, in: Proceedings of the 
2021 American Control Conference, 2021.
[70] M.-D. Hua, G. Allibert, Riccati observer design for pose, linear velocity, and 
gravity direction estimation using landmark position and IMU measurements, 
in: IEEE Conference on Control Technology and Applications, 2018.
[71] A. Barrau, S. Bonnabel, The invariant extended Kalman ﬁlter as a stable ob-
server, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control (2017).
[72] P. Stojakovic, B. Rasuo, Single propeller airplane minimal ﬂight speed based 
upon the lateral maneuver condition, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 49 (February 2016) 
239–249, https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .ast .2015 .12 .012.
[73] P. Stojakovic, K. Velimirovic, B. Rasuo, Power optimization of a single propeller 
airplane take-off run on the basis of lateral maneuver limitations, Aerosp. Sci. 
Technol. 72 (January 2018) 553–563, https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .ast .2017.10 .015.
[74] Analog devices ADIS16488A ten degrees of freedom inertial sensor data 
sheet, http://www.analog .com /media /en /technical -documentation /data -sheets /
ADIS16488A.pdf, 2015.
[75] Aeroprobe corporation air data systems data sheet, www.aeroprobe .com.
[76] E. Gallo, Quasi static atmospheric model for aircraft trajectory prediction and 
ﬂight simulation, arXiv:2101.10744v1, 2021.
[77] D. Simon, Optimal State Estimation, John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[78] Manual of the ICAO International Standard Atmosphere, tech. rep., 3rd edition, 
International Civil Aviation Organization, 2000, ICAO DOC-7488/3.
[79] J. Sola, Quaternion Kinematics for the Error-State Kalman Filter, tech. rep., 2017.
[80] Smithsonian Meteorological Tables, tech. rep., R.J. List, 1963.
[81] M.D. Shuster, A survey of attitude representations, J. Astronaut. Sci. (1993).
[82] Navigation Aids for Unmanned Aerial Systems in a GPS Denied Environment, 
Patent EP3267152A1, EP3267152B1, US20180010914A1.
[83] Sensonor STIM300 ultra high performance inertial measurement unit 
product brief, https://www.sensonor.com /products /inertial -measurement -units /
stim300/, 2013.
[84] A.V. Nebylov, J. Watson, Aerospace Navigation Systems, John Wiley & Sons, 
2016.
[85] P.T. Kabamba, A.R. Girard, Fundamentals of Aerospace Navigation and Guidance, 
Cambridge University Press, 2014.
[86] M. Bajovic, M. Zivanovic, B. Rasuo, P. Stojakovic, New general approach to air-
plane rotation analysis, Trans. Jpn. Soc. Aeronaut. Space Sci. 53 (August 2010) 
130–137, https://doi .org /10 .2322 /tjsass .53 .130.
30
=== END ===
