warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1402.pdf
sha256: 9F7769A5E5DB3D5F10A49924252EF2232F0B3C3521ACF79BACDF9C0F41C5BF4B
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 26
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
Citation: Martinez Rocamora, B., Jr.;
Lima, R.R.; Samarakoon, K.;
Rathjen, J.; Gross, J.N.; Pereira, G.A.S.
Oxpecker: A Tethered UAV for
Inspection of Stone-Mine Pillars.
Drones 2023, 7, 73. https://doi.org/
10.3390/drones7020073
Academic Editors: Sophie F.
Armanini and Raphael Zufferey
Received: 16 December 2022
Revised: 13 January 2023
Accepted: 17 January 2023
Published: 19 January 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
drones
Article
Oxpecker: A Tethered UAV for Inspection of Stone-Mine Pillars
Bernardo Martinez Rocamora, Jr. †
, Rogério R. Lima †
, Kieren Samarakoon
, Jeremy Rathjen
,
Jason N. Gross
and Guilherme A. S. Pereira *
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Benjamin M. Statler College of Engineering and
Mineral Resources, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA
* Correspondence: guilherme.pereira@mail.wvu.edu
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract:
This paper presents a state-of-the-art tethered unmanned aerial vehicle (TUAV) for
structural integrity assessment of underground stone mine pillars. The TUAV, powered by its tether,
works in tandem with an unmanned ground vehicle (UGV) that hosts the TUAV batteries, a self-
leveled landing platform, and the tether management system. The UGV and the TUAV were named
Rhino and Oxpecker, respectively, given that the TUAV stays landed on the UGV while the ensemble
moves inside a mine. The mission of Oxpecker is to create, using a LiDAR sensor, 3D maps of the
mine pillars to support time-lapse hazard mapping and time-dependent pillar degradation analysis.
Given the height of the pillars (7–12 m), this task cannot be executed by Rhino alone. This paper
describes the drone’s hardware and software. The hardware includes the tether management system,
designed to control the tension of the tether, and the tether perception system, which provides
information that can be used for localization and landing in global navigation satellite systems
(GNSS)-denied environments. The vehicle’s software is based on a state machine that controls the
several phases of a mission (i.e., takeoff, inspection, and landing) by coordinating drone motion with
the tethering system. The paper also describes and evaluates our approach for tether-based landing
and autonomous 3D mapping of pillars. We show experiments that illustrate and validate our system
in laboratories and underground mines.
Keywords: aerial robotics; mine inspection; tethered unmanned aerial vehicle; tethered drone;
autonomous landing; tether-guided landing
1. Introduction
Unmanned aerial vehicles, and more speciﬁcally multi-rotor drones, are progressively
being used in the mining industry [1]. They are used for surface and underground mines,
in operation or abandoned [2]. In surface mines, where Global Navigation Satellite Systems
(GNSS) are available, several applications, such as 3D mapping [3,4], stockpile volumetric
estimation [5], slope instability detection [5,6], erosion assessment [7], and site monitor-
ing [8], can be performed with off-the-shelf drones. However, for underground applications
that include geotechnical characterization [9,10], gas detection [11], and search and rescue
missions [12], adaptations to the vehicles and their navigation software need to be made.
The missions above, which are often executed by human technicians, can be carried out by
autonomous or semi-autonomous drones that, due to their increased speed and range, can
positively affect the efﬁciency, productivity, and safety of the task.
One of the main challenges for environments such as underground mines is the lack of
access to GNSS [13,14]. Teleoperation is also a challenge due to the limited range of radios
underground. Therefore, a robust onboard navigation system, which includes localization,
mapping, and motion planning, must be in place for a fully autonomous system to function
reliably. Whereas visual-based solutions, including visual inertial odometry (VIO), can
mostly solve the localization and mapping in general GNSS-denied environments [15,16],
underground environments are often dark and lack distinct features [17], motivating
Drones 2023, 7, 73. https://doi.org/10.3390/drones7020073
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/drones
[p.2]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
2 of 26
modern solutions to rely on light detection and ranging (LiDAR) sensors [18] and thermal
cameras [19]. An additional drone limitation emphasized underground is its short ﬂight
time, which limits the area that can be covered in a single mission.
This article describes the development of a state-of-the-art tether-powered unmanned
aerial vehicle (TUAV), which is part of the complete autonomous robotic system shown
in Figure 1. The system, composed of an unmanned ground vehicle (UGV), called Rhino,
and the TUAV, known as Oxpecker, was designed to provide early warning signs on
underground stone mine pillar structural integrity. When in operation, the system records
3D point-cloud data of pillars to support time-lapse hazard mapping and time-dependent
pillar degradation analysis. Because stone mines have pillars varying from 7 to 12 m in
height, sensors on the UGV alone cannot obtain high-resolution data of the entire pillar,
thus justifying the deployment of the TUAV each time a pillar must be surveyed. As
the UAV batteries are carried by the UGV and the tether provides relative measurements
between the vehicles, the proposed conﬁguration not only increases the battery capacity of
the drone but also allows drone navigation and landing without vision.
Figure 1. Rhino, the unmanned ground vehicle (UGV), is a mobile robot in yellow and blue. Oxpecker,
the tethered unmanned aerial vehicle (TUAV), is the drone in black on top of the blue platform. Rhino
and Oxpecker form a cooperative robotic system for underground mine mapping.
In our system, a set of high-energy density batteries was added to Rhino’s payload to
achieve long-endurance ﬂights of Oxpecker. The batteries can deliver an average power
of 570 W (i.e., 38 V at 15 A) to the TUAV through a power cable. Two other subsystems
were designed to integrate and handle the tether. First, a tether management subsystem
was developed to control the tension (i.e., force) on the cable, keeping it in suspension and
preventing it from touching the ground. A second subsystem consists of a set of sensors
used by the drone for localization and landing. These sensors measure the length of the
tether and tether angles at both endpoints (i.e., the TUAV and the landing platform on
the UGV). This paper also describes the software architecture that handles the different
phases of the TUAV mission: autonomous takeoff, mapping, and landing. These phases
are driven by a state machine, which communicates with the tethering system via robot
operating system (ROS) [20] messages over a local WiFi network. For the mapping phase,
we developed a path planning methodology to create a dense point-cloud map of the
pillars while avoiding collision with the ﬂoor and ceiling and a LiDAR-based strategy for
controlling the TUAV. We also introduce a robust landing approach that does not depend
on any external sensor, such as vision or LiDAR, and only relies on measurements from the
[p.3]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
3 of 26
tether angle sensor (azimuth and elevation angles) and altitude readings coming from an
altimeter. This approach is able to safely and robustly make Oxpecker approach and land
on the platform on Rhino.
Therefore, the contributions of this work are:
1.
The design of a tether-powered multi-rotor UAV for long-term robotics,
2.
The design of a tethering perception system,
3.
The design of a cable management system capable of conveying power to the TUAV
and also controlling the tension of the tether,
4.
A motion planning and control strategy for unknown pillar surveying and mapping
in a GNSS-degraded environment,
5.
A strategy for autonomous landing using tether variables.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Relevant related work is presented in
Section 2. The hardware of the UAV and companion systems is explained in Section 3. The
software architecture is detailed in Section 4. Section 5 presents a series of ﬁeld experiments
that illustrate and evaluate the proposed approach. Finally, Section 6 presents conclusions
and proposals for future work.
2. Related Work
Ground and aerial robots have been used separately for search and rescue and map-
ping applications in underground mines [10,14,21]. However, using robots of a single
locomotion type introduces problems such as limited endurance and payload (in the case
of an aerial robot) or restrictions on which places can be reached or inspected (in the case of
a ground robot). Thus, recent studies show increased attention to multi-robot collaboration
with teams of heterogeneous robots [12,22].
Six of the eight teams competing in the systems track of the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Subterranean Challenge (SubT), a game-changer com-
petition for robotic technologies in subterranean environments [23–28], have used a com-
bination of robots that included both UGVs and UAVs to map, navigate, and search
underground environments during time-sensitive combat operations or disaster response
scenarios. Team CERBERUS used legged, wheeled, and ﬂying robots [23]. Team CSIRO
Data61 used tracked vehicles, legged robots, and drones [24]. Team Explorer used custom-
built wheeled and ﬂying robots, some of them deployed by the UGVs [25]. Team CoSTAR
used legged, wheeled, and drones [26]. Team CTU-CRAS-NORLAB used legged, tracked,
and ﬂying robots [27]. Team Coordinated Robotics used wheeled and ﬂying robots [23].
Only teams Robotika, which used wheeled robots, and team MARBLE [28], which used
legged and wheeled robots, avoided the use of aerial robots [23].
During the SubT competition, all teams that used aerial robots, including the winning
team [23], deployed the drones independently from the ground robots. While this permitted
the teams to increase the reach of their systems, they still faced the problem of endurance, as
the ﬂight time for battery-powered drones is very short. For example, the RMF-Owl [29], a
collision-tolerant aerial robot developed by team CERBERUS, is equipped with a 5000 mAh
LiPo battery and is only able to ﬂy for 10 min. Similarly, Flyability’s Elios 3 [30], a state-of-
art commercial drone designed for underground mining inspection and whose predecessor,
Elios 1, was also used by team CERBERUS, is only able to ﬂy for 12.5 min (without payload).
More recently, in [31], new developments are trying to increase the time of operation of
a drone by carrying it on the back of a quadruped robot, which would allow continuous
operation for about an hour. However, without any recharging strategy, the drone ﬂight
time is still limited to the same 10 min.
In our work, we propose to have a ground vehicle carrying a drone and a tether
connecting both robots. The tether is used to power the UAV with large batteries carried by
the UGV. The obvious beneﬁt of including a tether is an extended ﬂight time for the UAV,
given that batteries represent a big share of the takeoff weight of a drone. This solution has
been explored before in [32]. A comparison of the energy consumption between battery-
powered and tether-powered drones was provided by [33]. More recently, research on
[p.4]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
4 of 26
providing power for a series of quadcopters showed that the serialization of tethered drones
could make the system even more efﬁcient and advantageous [34]. However, although
tethering the drone can increase ﬂight time, it comes at the cost of reduced reach. In
our case, this is compensated for by the mobility of the ground robot and the nature of
the environment where the robotic system is deployed, i.e., cavernous and of limited
height. A complete review of alternatives to power drones, which includes complex tasks
such as swapping batteries [35] or self-recharging [36], is presented in [37]. Although we
considered some of these alternatives in our work, the additional beneﬁts brought by the
tether, including precise landing and localization [38], led us to decide on this approach.
If properly instrumented, the tether connecting the UAV to its base (in our case, a
UGV) can provide relative localization [39]. The approach developed by our research team
is described in [38], which was followed by a similar approach in [40]. The main advantage
of these works with respect to previous ones [41,42] is the fact that they do not assume that
the tether is taut or has minimum slack [43], but, instead, allow it to be slack by modeling
its shape with a catenary curve.
Finally, assuming instrumentation similar to that used for tether-based localization,
the tether can also be used to aid in landing the UAV. In contrast to previous landing
methodologies [44–47], this allows the drone to land precisely without the requirement of
the relative localization between the vehicle and the landing platform, which can be noisy
and biased. Precise landing using a tether to guide the UAV towards the landing point was
explored in [48–50].
The next section will describe the hardware of our system, which includes all the
sensors used for localization and landing.
3. System Hardware
This section describes the design requirements and engineering decisions made by
our team for the TUAV system, which includes the tether management and sensing system
and an actuated landing platform.
3.1. Mission Requirements and Design Decisions
The main requirement of this project is that the pillars of the mine, the height of which
may vary from 7 to 12 m, are autonomously and completely scanned with a LiDAR or
camera so that a 3D map can be constructed and used for hazard assessment. Although a
standard UAV could be applied to this task, its short ﬂight time would not be practical for
mines with hundreds of pillars. On the other hand, a UGV alone could not scan a single
pillar completely unless it is equipped with a telescopic device/manipulator that would be
able to move the sensors along the pillar until its top. After considering this solution as
cumbersome and costly, our team then considered the use of a drone, which would work
in tandem with the UGV. The mission requirements for this drone are listed as follows:
•
Able to operate for several hours without human intervention;
•
Able to carry mapping and surveying sensors, including LiDARs and cameras;
•
Able to precisely land on the UGV before moving from one pillar to the next.
These requirements lead the research team to design:
•
A tether-powered quadrotor with enough payload capacity to carry localization and
3D mapping sensors, and the weight of the released power cable;
•
A tethering system that manages the cable release and retraction and that assists the
drone localization and landing by measuring relevant variables, such as tether angles
and tether length;
•
A self-leveling landing platform that compensates for the roll and pitch of the ground
vehicle and assists in drone landing.
The development of the drone and the other subsystems is described in the
following subsections.
[p.5]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
5 of 26
3.2. TUAV System
This section overviews the design concept of Oxpecker, the proposed TUAV. The goal
of this design was to develop a drone that is able to be powered by a cable and has enough
payload capacity to carry the required instruments and the tether. The main challenge of
designing such a system was working on the trade-offs of transmitting such high power
over a long cable. Our solution required a combined selection of frame, powertrain, and
cable. To complete the design, we selected the ﬂight controller, companion computer, and
sensor suite onboard the drone. A schematic overview of the hardware setup can be seen
in Figure 2. Table A1 lists the components required to assemble Oxpecker along with their
manufacturers, models, and other relevant speciﬁcations. The most relevant components
are discussed below.
Intel NUC
i5 
Garmin 
LidarLite v4
Intel RS 
T265
Intel RS 
L515
Garmin 
LidarLite v3
Holybro 
GPS M8N
Spektrum
AR520
4x T-Motor
Flame 60A HV
4x T-Motor
MN5120
Holybro
PM07
Holybro
Pixhawk 4
Holybro SiK
Telemetry Radio
Anker
USB Hub 3.0
3x Battery
12.8V
Tether 
Sensor
DC-DC 
Converter
Arduino 
UNO R3
Figure 2. Schematic overview of Oxpecker’s electronics. Except for the battery pack, all other
components are carried onboard by the drone.
3.2.1. Cable Speciﬁcation
An electrical cable has its resistance given by R = ρ L/A, where L is the cable length,
ρ is the material resistivity, and A is the cross-sectional area. Therefore, the longer the
cable, the higher the resistance. In the presence of a current i, the voltage drop ∆v along
the cable is ruled by ∆v = Ri. The current and voltage drop directly translate into energy
loss by Joule’s law (heat dissipation), which states that the power converted from electrical
energy to thermal energy is given by P = ∆v · i = (ρL/A) · i2. One way to reduce the
resistance, and thus the power loss, is to increase the cross-sectional area of the conductor.
However, this approach contributes to increasing the weight of the cable to be suspended
by the drone. We could also reduce the length of the cable, which would limit the reach of
the drone. A feasible alternative to minimize the power loss without shortening the cable
[p.6]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
6 of 26
is raising the voltage delivered to the drone, thus reducing the current ﬂowing through
the tether for the same power consumption. As the power loss on the cable scales with
the square of the current, this would be the best approach to take. Additionally, smaller
currents permit the use of conductors with reduced cross-sectional areas, which contributes
to decreasing the cable’s linear weight. Many commercial applications prefer to transmit
power at a very high voltage (e.g., 400 V) and include a voltage converter on the UAV to
reduce the voltage level required by the motors and ﬂight controller. However, as the
payload is a critical constraint in our design and power conversion devices are usually not
lightweight, we decided to increase the voltage as much as possible to connect it directly to
the power management board without a DC-DC converter.
Given an estimated power-to-weight ratio of ≈150 W kg−1, which is consistent with
the speciﬁc power estimates of 200 W kg−1 for agile quadrotors shown in [51], and a maxi-
mum hovering weight of ≈4 kg, we selected the cable for an expected power consumption
of 600 W on the drone. We then chose to use three 12.8 V batteries connected in series to
power the TUAV. Given the open-circuit battery voltage of vb = 3 × 12.8 = 38.4 V and
the required power of 600 W, an initial current estimate on the cable without assuming
any voltage drop would be ≈15.6 A. By assuming a 16 AWG stranded copper cable with
resistivity 0.0132 Ωm−1, which has adequate ﬂexibility for our application, and also con-
sidering the additional resistance of 0.15 Ωfrom connectors and other parts of the circuit,
we can iterate the voltage drop until convergence is reached. By applying this process, we
compared different tether lengths and opted for a 15 m-long cable, which is sufﬁcient for
our task. The estimated voltage drop in this cable is ∆v ≈6.6 V when the current is 18.8 A.
This yields a power loss of ≈123.5 W along the tether.
The powertrain of the quadcopter, speciﬁcally, electronic speed controllers (ESCs),
motors, and propellers, were chosen to handle high voltage (38.4 V) from the tether and
provide enough thrust to match the maximum hovering weight of the drone (≈4 kg). We
considered that the system would work around the 8S voltage rating after accounting for
the losses on the cable and expected power consumption for the drone (≈600 W). The
power delivered was considered to be approximately constant during its mission, as the
drone is not expected to be agile and will work in near-hover ﬂight conditions all the time.
The selected motor was the T-MOTOR MN3520 (rated 4S-8S) with a T-MOTOR 12 × 4
carbon ﬁber propeller, using a T-MOTOR FLAME 60A HV ESC (rated for 6S-12S). In our
tests, we measured the voltage (≈33.5 V) and current (≈18.5 A) delivered to Oxpecker
during ﬂight, conﬁrming the expected power consumption (≈620 W) and validating the
selection of the powertrain.
3.2.2. Frame Selection
The frame is the structure that holds all the components of a quadrotor together. It
needs to be designed to be strong but also lightweight. The lighter a frame is, the more
payload the drone can carry. A great way to optimize the airframe is to select carbon ﬁber
frames. We chose an easy-access, commercial frame for this aerial system, the Holybro
X500 Frame Kit. This frame was selected because it is easy to assemble and is capable
of supporting the estimated maximum takeoff weight for this drone (4 kg). Adaptations
have been made to install the heavier, higher voltage motors selected (e.g., 3D printing
reinforced clamps that hold the arms and the motors).
3.2.3. Flight Controller Selection
A review of ﬂight controller options in [52], shows that, typically, research groups
rely on Pixhawk-PX4, Parrot, or DJI low-level controllers. They are mostly used as black
boxes, but they differ in how much authority is given to change the controllers. The ﬂight
controller unit (FCU) selected for the drone was the Pixhawk 4, which is optimized to run
PX4, an open-source ﬂight control software for UAVs and other unmanned vehicles. It pro-
vides all the main sensing capabilities required by a UAV, such as an inertial measurement
unit (IMU) and barometer, and ports to integrate several others directly. For Oxpecker, we
[p.7]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
7 of 26
integrated a U-Blox Neo-M8N GPS/GLONASS receiver to provide a compass, a SiK Teleme-
try Radio V3 for monitoring and debugging purposes using QGroundControl, a Garmin
LidarLite v3 ranging sensor to provide height measurements, and a Spektrum AR620
receiver to provide manual radio control. A large community also supports the Pixhawk,
and it can easily be integrated with a companion computer through the MAVLINK [53]
communication protocol.
3.2.4. Companion Computer Selection
Given that the Pixhawk 4 has very limited onboard computing capability, a companion
computer is required to run custom software for the drone and allow for data collection
(i.e., images and point clouds). There are many options for companion computers, and
the most popular are listed in [52]. When no GPU is required, the Intel NUC family, the
Udoo family, and the Raspberry family of computers are the most popular options. From
our previous experience, fully autonomous operation, including localization and mapping,
is possible with an embedded computer with extended RAM and storage. Originally,
the Udoo X86 II Ultra with an Intel® Pentium® N3710 (2.56 GHz, 8 Gb RAM, 32 GB
eMMC Storage, 150 g, 6 W) was tested due to its lower cost. Moreover, this computer
also contains an Arduino Leonardo-compatible platform embedded on the same board,
which facilitates the integration of I2C and analog sensors, such as the potentiometers
we use to measure tether angles. However, although enough to perform basic functions
(landing, wall following, etc.) and to save data, this computer was not powerful enough
to run simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) algorithms online. Subsequently,
we opted to substitute this embedded computer with an Intel® NUC 11 with an Intel®
Core™i5-1135G7 processor (8M cache, up to 4.20 GHz) and an external Arduino UNO
R3 for low-level sensor communication. Additionally, we included a 2TB SSD card for
storing the mapping data. The custom software running in this computer was developed
using the Robot Operating System (ROS) and is described further in this paper. The
communication between the companion computer and the Pixhawk was done using the
MAVROS package [54]. A USB hub was connected to the computer to allow for several USB
devices: WiFi antenna, notiﬁcation light, Arduino, Pixhawk, stereo camera, and LiDAR.
3.2.5. Sensors Suite Selection
Localization in a GNSS-denied environment is a challenging problem [19], and redun-
dancy is required. In our design, the sensor arrangement converged to ranging and distance
sensors, a tether angle sensor, and a tracking camera for visual inertial odometry (VIO). A
telemetry antenna, a radio controller receiver, and a GPS antenna (here for the compass)
were also added directly to the ﬂight controller. Some of these sensors are described next.
Ranging Sensors
Given the environment where the system is deployed, range measurements to the ﬂoor
and ceiling are crucial for safe ﬂight. In our design, these distances are measured using
Garmin LidarLite optical distance measurement sensors, which are compact, lightweight,
and have low power consumption. A LidarLite v3, measuring the distance to the ﬂoor,
was integrated directly into the ﬂight controller (Pixhawk 4), being used on its internal
EKF and for the landing procedure. A LidarLite v4, measuring distance to the ceiling,
was integrated into the TUAV using an Arduino UNO R3 to guarantee a safe distance
from the mine ceiling. Additionally, a DWM1001-DEV development board, which includes
the DWM1001C ultra-wideband (UWB) transceiver module, was added to the system to
provide ranging measurements between the TUAV and the UGV. Although not discussed
in this paper, UWB data can be used to improve the drone’s relative localization in sensor
fusion algorithms [55,56].
[p.8]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
8 of 26
Tracking Camera
A requirement for autonomous ﬂight is a good odometry solution. A complete solution
for position and velocity estimation is the Intel® RealSense™Tracking Camera T265. It is
a stand-alone module that runs V-SLAM (visual simultaneous localization and mapping)
algorithms directly on it and provides a visual inertial odometry (VIO) solution. It is also a
compact and lightweight module that operates at lower power. In our TUAV, the tracking
camera was mounted facing forward. The main limitation of the T265 camera is that it is
generally limited to light levels higher than 15 lux, which is low but is usually more than
what is available in an underground mine. To deal with this problem, we included two
spotlights on the TUAV to provide illumination. The Intel® RealSense™T265 odometry
solution was integrated directly into the ﬂight controller localization solution.
Mapping Sensor
For our application, we tested the Intel® RealSense™D435 depth camera, the Microsoft®
Kinect™Azure development kit, and the Intel® RealSense™L515 solid-state LiDAR depth
camera. These options have been compared before for SLAM applications [57], but usually
not under low light conditions. Considering the performance that we observed in dark
environments (noise level and susceptibility to reﬂections), and other metrics such as power
consumption, and weight trade-offs, the L515 camera was chosen as the most suitable
our application. The L515 was designed to be used in indoor, controlled environments.
Compared to the D435 camera, the L515 is slightly heavier (100 g against 72 g), it has a
smaller range (9 m against 10 m) and it has same power consumption (3.5 W). However, it
provides measurements with lower noise levels in dark environments. Compared to the
Kinect™Azure, the L515 is signiﬁcantly lighter (100 g against 440 g), it has a larger range
(9 m against 3 m), it consumes less power (3.5 W compared to 5.9 W), and it is also more
robust to low light conditions and reﬂective surfaces.
Tether Sensors
Sensors on the drone and the tethering system are used to measure the tether variables.
These sensors are the encoder, which is connected to the winch and measures the length
of the tether, and the tether angle sensors, which are designed to measure the azimuth
and elevation angles of the tether on both endpoints, i.e., at the landing platform and
the TUAV. Figure 3a shows the custom 3D-printed sensor speciﬁcally designed for angle
measurement at the platform, whereas Figure 3b shows a commercial-off-the-shelf joystick
device converted to be used as the tether angle sensor at the TUAV side. A more detailed
explanation of the functioning of these devices is provided in the following subsection.
(a) At the UGV side.
(b) At the TUAV side.
Figure 3. Tether angle sensors: (a) shows a kinematic chain with two degrees of freedom designed
to measure azimuth and elevation angles at the platform; (b) shows an analog joystick adapted to
obtain the same angles at the drone side.
[p.9]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
9 of 26
3.3. Tethering System
The tethering system is composed of (1) a cable management system, responsible for
controlling the tether tension by reeling the tether in or out, depending on the measured
tension; (2) a tensiometer for measuring the tether tension; and (3) two tether angle sensors.
Tension is measured by a mechanism composed of a pivoted spring-load lever arm with
conveying pulleys where the tether slides off, as shown in Figure 4. A mechanism composed
of a servomotor and a lever arm is used to evenly distribute the cable on the reel when
turning, as depicted in Figure 4a(D). The lever arm moves synchronously with the reel’s
spin, which can be properly adjusted in ﬁrmware. The control system is accomplished
by a digital proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller implemented in an Arduino
microcontroller. In order to deliver power to the TUAV through the cable, a slip ring is
used to convey electrical power through the reel. The tethering system is assembled in a
compartment located at the rear of the ground robot.
A
E
B
C
D
F
G
H
I
J
K
(a) CAD.
(b) Hardware.
Figure 4. Cable management system. (a) Three-dimensional CAD model of the system highlighting
the slip ring device (A), which allows the power to be transmitted from its external ﬁxed frame to the
internal rotating frame physically attached to a custom 3D printed spool (B) where the power cable is
stored. The cable goes inside the spool’s axis, comes out from (C), and passes through a funnel-like
device (D). This device is driven by a servomotor that moves from side to side to evenly distribute
the cable over the spool. The length of the tether is measured by a digital rotary encoder (E) when the
DC motor (F) is turning. The tether tension is measured by a potentiometer (G) installed in the axis of
a pivoted lever arm (H), which supports a pair of pulleys (J) where the cable can slide off. A spring
(I) is used to load the lever arm. The cable access the system through the outlet (K). (b) Real-world
implementation of the designed system.
Two tether angle sensors were designed in-house. A joystick-like device was adapted
(see Figure 3b) for the sensor at the drone endpoint of the tether. Because the axes of
rotation for this device are co-planar, the measurements of its potentiometers can be directly
translated to the tether’s azimuth and elevation angles by converting the voltage read
by a microcontroller analog-to-digital converter (ADC) port and applying a calibration
curve. A similar approach was used for the sensor at the platform endpoint of the tether,
where we have the custom design shown in Figure 3a. To obtain the tether azimuth and
elevation angles for this device, a kinematic chain system needs to be solved to obtain
a frame transformation from the platform frame opxpypzp to the tether endpoint frame
otxtytzt. We followed the Denavit–Hartenberg convention [58] to attach reference frames
to the kinematic chain, shown in Figure 5, and ﬁnd the frame transformation. The rotation
matrix component of this transformation, Rt
p is given by
Rt
p =


−sin q2
−cos q2
0
−cos q2 sin q1
sin q1 sin q2
−cos q1
cos q1 cos q2
−cos q1 sin q2
−sin q1

,
(1)
[p.10]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
10 of 26
where q1 and q2 are the joint angles measured using the potentiometers. Subsequently, the
tether azimuth αp and elevation ϕp angles at the platform endpoint can be obtained from
the components of the tether vector t = [tx
ty
tz] T = Rt
p [1
0
0] T as









αp
=
tan−1( ty
tx ) ,
ϕp
=

tan−1


tz
q
t2x + t2y



.
(2)
opxpypzp
otxtytzt
𝜑p
𝛼p
q1
q2
t
Figure 5. Tether sensor coordinate frames.
3.4. Self-Leveling Landing Platform System
A self-leveling platform was included in the UGV to provide a stable, level surface
for the UAV to land on. In our design, we used a tri-axial accelerometer and two linear
actuators to adjust the platform attitude and maintain it horizontally leveled, even when
the UGV is located on uneven terrain or a slope, as shown in Figure 6a. This platform helps
to ensure that the UAV lands safely and precisely without tipping over or damaging itself
or its surroundings.
(a) Self-leveling platform.
Landing Gear
Octagonal 
Platform
Bracket
Tether Angle
Sensor
(b) Platform parts and landing gear.
Ball Joint
Pivot Joint
Linear
Actuators
Universal
Joint
Removable 
Pin
(c) Platform mounting.
Figure 6. Self-leveling landing platform system: (a) the platform compensates for the angles of the
UGV by increasing the strokes of the linear actuators; (b) the shape of the platform viewed from
above and below and the shape of the landing gear that ﬁts in a depression located in the center of
the platform; (c) side view of the mounting points of the platform.
[p.11]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
11 of 26
The landing platform was designed with an octagonal shape and a central depression
to serve as a passive positioning mechanism and to securely hold the UAV in place when
the UGV moves, as illustrated in Figure 6b. On the UAV side, a landing gear was designed
to match the depression in the landing platform. Its circular shape allows the UAV to land
without any orientation constraints. This design enables the platform to function effectively
as a landing and docking station for the UAV. A bracket to hold the tether angle sensor was
mounted below the platform in the center of the depression.
The octagonal platform is connected to three points that are physically attached to two
Progressive Automations’ PA-14P 12-inch stroke linear actuators and a universal joint, as
illustrated in Figure 6c. As expected, the point representing the ﬁxation to the universal
joint, O in Figure 7a, does not translate and only rotates. The two points representing the
ﬁxation to the linear actuators, A and B, can translate and rotate when the linear actuators
increase or decrease their stroke. The displacement of these two points allows for two
possible rotation angles of the platform. If A and B move in opposite directions with respect
to the horizontal plane, the deck rolls around its x-axis. If A and B move in the same
direction, the platform pitches around its y-axis. Therefore, with a combination of these two
movements, it is possible to adjust the roll and pitch angles of the platform. A schematic of
this movement is shown in Figure 7a.
zO
xO
Pitch (𝜃)
yO
Roll (𝜙)
B
Horizontal
plane
∆zB= ∆zr
B + ∆zp
B
∆zA= ∆zr
A + ∆zp
A
O
A
zO
xO
O
A,B
∆zp
A, ∆zp
B
𝜃
xOzO plane (pitch)
zO
yO
A
B
O
∆zr
B
∆zr
A
𝜙
yOzO plane (roll)
(a) Schematics.
Attitude 
Sensor
Linear
Actuators
PID 
Controller
r
y
e
u
𝜙, 𝜃
Platform
∆zA,
B
y
(b) Control architecture.
Figure 7. Self-leveling platform control system: (a) schematic representation of the platform and its
three mounting points, along with illustrations of the roll and pitch actions that can be created using
the linear actuators; (b) control loop used to level the platform. A PID controller tries to control the
roll (φp) and pitch (θp) angles of the platform using a zero attitude reference signal r.
To automatically control the platform’s attitude, a closed-loop control system (Figure 7b)
was designed using zero roll and pitch angles as setpoints. The controller chosen was
the discrete PID control due to its ease of implementation and tuning process. Assuming
that the UGV is static and that the only acceleration applied to the system is gravity, the
platform attitude is estimated by ﬁnding the Euler angles in the transformation
ab = Rb
ngn ,
where ab is the gravity acceleration decomposed in the accelerometer’s frame b, which in
turn is aligned with the platform; Rb
n is the rotation matrix between the inertial and the
body frames as a function of the platform attitude angles roll (φp) and pitch (θp); and g is
[p.12]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
12 of 26
the gravity vector in the inertial reference frame n pointing downwards. By rewriting this
equation in matrix form, we have:


ax
ay
az

=


r11
r12
−sin φp
r21
r22
sin φp cos θp
r31
r32
cos φp cos θp




0
0
g

,
(3)
where g is the module of the acceleration vector. Solving Equation (3) for φ and θ, we obtain



φp
=
arctan
 ay
az

,
θp
=
arcsin

−ax
g

.
(4)
which are then used to decompose the gravity acceleration from a tri-axial accelerometer
(ADXL345) and used to close the controller’s feedback loop.
4. Software Architecture
This section describes the framework developed to operate the TUAV in a stone mine
environment. This section is divided into three parts. The ﬁrst describes the general
software architecture, the second describes the mapping procedure, and the third describes
the landing procedure.
4.1. Autonomy Framework
For the development of the autonomy framework of the TUAV, we developed a set
of ROS nodes to control the drone operation. These nodes were distributed between the
computers of the ground and aerial robots. An overview of the UAV and UGV systems
and their software is shown in Figure 8. The state machine node selects which mission the
TUAV will execute by enabling a mission node. This is done by broadcasting the active
node through an ROS topic. The number of mission nodes is variable, depending on the
application. The mission nodes generate commands that are sent to the commander node,
the only node able to communicate with the actual TUAV. This makes this stack generic
and independent of the TUAV platform. In our experiments, for example, we used a DJI
drone by simply changing the command node, which is the only platform-dependent
node. For our speciﬁc setup, the TUAV commander node is able to control the TUAV
using auto-takeoff, auto-landing, target position, and target velocity commands. Other
than takeoff, which is usually a native function of the drone’s controller, in our application,
we split the actions of the TUAV into two missions: mapping and landing. The mapping
mission node is responsible for moving towards the pillar and executing a lawnmower
pattern to map the pillar surface. The landing mission node is responsible for returning
the TUAV to the ground vehicle and landing using only tether information. These two
missions will be detailed later in this section.
4.2. Velocity Estimation and Localization
Our framework relies on velocity-based control and thus requires that the drone’s
velocity is reliably estimated. For that, the Intel® RealSense™T265 odometry solution was
integrated directly into the ﬂight controller localization solution, which estimates the drone
position and velocity.
Although not explored in this paper, we also developed our localization approach,
which uses the tether to obtain relative localization with respect to the landing platform.
The complete methodology is explained in [38]. The approach considers a ﬂexible tether
with a catenary shape, which can be mathematically modeled. The model, which is based
on tether variables such as tether length, tension, and tether angles on both endpoints, can
provide a relative localization solution. This solution is fused with the IMU measurements
using a sensor fusion algorithm based on the extended Kalman ﬁlter (EKF).
[p.13]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
13 of 26
Rhino (UGV) System
Other Subsystems
Oxpecker (TUAV) System
Companion Computer
Tether Management Subsystem
Platform Subsystem
Rover
Subsystem A
Rover
Subsystem B
...
Rover
Subsystem Z
State
Machine
Tether
Tension
Mission
Map
Mission
Takeoff
Mission
Land
Tether
Variables
Command
Wall
Following
Interface
MAVROS
VIO
Angle
Sensor
Companion
Computer
Angle Sensor &
Winch
Micro
Controller
Micro
Controller
Intel RS
L515
Intel RS
T265
Micro
Controller
Pixhawk4
ON
START
SET
START
Oxpecker
Winch
Platform &
Actuators
Tether Angle
Sensor
Figure 8. Cooperative autonomous system framework (UAV-UGV). On the left: a schematic overview
of Oxpecker’s system. On the right: a schematic overview of Rhino’s subsystems related to the
drone operation. The rounded gray rectangles represent the ROS nodes developed to operate the
autonomous system.
4.3. Wall Coverage
The coverage software on Oxpecker is designed to survey and map the face of a
pillar or wall by executing a predeﬁned trajectory. The area to be covered is assumed
to be rectangular, and the chosen trajectory is a sweeping pattern, as shown in Figure 9.
The sweeping pattern is implemented to cover the entirety of the area, which is done by
designing the coverage rows to be perpendicular to the shortest height of the coverage area.
As stated in [59], this ensures that the trajectory involves ﬂying the least number of turns,
which directly affects the duration, route length, and energy consumption.
zw
Image overlap
zw
yw
x
FOV
D
L
dw,x
Sweeping direction
dw,z
xw
H
dw,y
Vsweep
Vsweep
LiDAR Image
Figure 9. Sweep pattern implemented to cover an entire area with a distance of D between coverage rows.
To determine the number of rows required in the pattern, the approach outlined in [60]
is followed as was done in our previous work [61]. The ﬁrst step is to determine the
[p.14]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
14 of 26
camera’s footprint, L, which can be calculated using the geometric relationship between the
distance from the camera plane to the wall, dw,x, and the camera’s ﬁeld of view (FOV) [62]:
L = 2dw,x × tan
FOV
2

.
(5)
The footprint is then used to determine the number of coverage rows and the gap
needed to acquire a wanted overlap as represented in Figure 9. The number of coverage
rows is computed as
N =
H
L(1 −s) ,
(6)
where H is the height of the coverage area, and s is the desired overlap between two images
as a fraction. The distance between the coverage rows can be calculated as
D = H
N .
(7)
For the complete design of the trajectory, lateral overlaps must also be considered.
Whereas longitudinal overlaps are determined by coverage rows, lateral overlaps are
related to the speed of the UAV, Vsweep, and the frame rate of the camera as
Vsweep = 1 −slateral
L × f
,
(8)
where slateral is the overlap expressed as a fraction, L is the image footprint, and f is the
frame rate in frames/second.
After deﬁning the survey parameters, the path of the UAV along the coverage rows
can be deﬁned by a set of 3D points (dw,x, dw,y, dw,z), where dw,x represents the distance
from the drone to the wall, dw,y is the distance from the right border of the wall, and dw,z
represents the height of a coverage line from the ground. Since we have several rows, the z
coordinate is calculated for each row as
d(i)
w,x = i × D −D
2 ,
i = 1, . . . , Nl .
(9)
Our previous research [61] used visual-inertial odometry (VIO) and predeﬁned way-
points (a sequence of (x, y, z) coordinates) to navigate the drone to follow the desired
pattern. However, this method is not practical when mapping walls of different lengths
(y coordinates of the path would change for each wall) and was prone to position drift due
to the featureless environment. Therefore, in this work, we proposed a reactive method
of coverage that relies on ﬂying the drone in front of the wall until it ﬁnds its border. An
edge-detection software was then developed to replace the necessity of predeﬁned way-
points along the y axis. This software processes the raw depth image given by the drone’s
LiDAR (RealSense™L515) and calculates the difference between the average depth of the
outer left and outer right sides of the image. If the difference exceeds a set threshold, an
edge is detected. Although we chose to use a low-noise sensor, to cope with eventual noise
on the depth image given by the sensor, several steps are taken by the system. First, the
sensor is conﬁgured to work in a given range, thus outputting a constant value for distances
outside this range. This can be observed in Figure 10b, which shows a ﬂat black region
representing points very far from the sensor. Second, after the depth image is received, the
software applies to the image a binary mask that removes the ceiling and the ﬂoor from the
data, keeping only the region of interest situated in between these two regions. Finally, a
sequence of morphological operations (erosions and dilations) are applied to the masked
data to remove additional noise.
[p.15]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
15 of 26
(a) RGB image.
(b) Depth image.
Figure 10. Raw snapshots from an instance when the edge is detected: (a) shows the color image of a
pillar in a coal mine (the image is blurry due to the motion of the drone); (b) shows a depth image
of the same instant. Notice that when the edge is detected, if the drone is leveled, a void appears in
the center-right part of the depth image, indicating that the distance in that region is outside of the
predeﬁned processing distance. The top-right and bottom-right are ignored, as they can show the
ground or ceiling depending on the pillar’s height and the drone’s relative position.
The x coordinate of the path represents the drone’s distance to the wall. In our ap-
proach, we keep a ﬁxed distance from the wall using software that also relies on LiDAR data.
In addition to keeping a constant distance, the controller adjusts the drone’s orientation so
that the camera is parallel to the surface being scanned. As illustrated in Figure 11, being
parallel and at a ﬁxed distance from the wall is important, especially when the wall is not
planar. Furthermore, different distances and orientations can cause consecutive images to
not have the appropriate overlap.
To execute the complete path shown in Figure 9, a state machine within the “Mission
Map” ROS node (Figure 8) was developed. This node uses the information obtained from
the wall-following software (another ROS node) and altimeter to execute the algorithm
shown in Figure 12. While the wall-following node maintains a ﬁxed distance from the
wall and detects the edges, the altimeter attempts to maintain a speciﬁc row height until
the next row must be executed.
2
1
4
5
3
Figure 11. Top view of a UAV scanning the wall (in gray) at ﬁve different timestamps. At timestamps
1 and 2, the wall is basically ﬂat, and the drone is able to move safely at a determined distance from the
wall. At timestamps 3 and 4, the drone faces a bump in the wall. If the drone keeps moving laterally
without adjusting the distance (transparencies), we may have an inconsistent overlap between the
images captured at the current and next timestamp. The depictions without transparency illustrate
how our controller handles the problem following its contour by adjusting the orientation and
distance from the wall. At timestamp 5, the drone is not able to detect a valid distance on the leftmost
beam (dashed lines), which indicates an edge of the pillar (see Figure 10) and a need to switch the
direction of movement.
[p.16]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
16 of 26
MISSION MAP
MISSION
TAKEOFF
MISSION
LAND
TRUE
FALSE
Completed
Path?
TRUE
FALSE
Detected
Right Edge?
TRUE
FALSE
Detected
Left Edge?
TRUE
FALSE
Odd Row 
Number?
Scan Left
Scan Right
Adjust Height
Approach
Wall
Figure 12. Sweeping trajectory execution algorithm within the “Mission Map” block.
4.4. Tether-Guided Landing
For the TUAV to land accurately on the landing platform situated on the UGV, an
algorithm based solely on an altimeter (laser range ﬁnder onboard the vehicle) and the tether
angle sensors on the TUAV (see Figure 3b) was developed. Therefore, our method does
not require a precise localization of the UAV to perform a precise landing on the platform.
The ROS node implemented to land the drone is represented by the “Mission Land” block
in Figure 8. When this block is activated, the “State Machine” block communicates with
the tethering system to set the tension setpoint to a higher value so that the tether tends to
become taut, which is the ideal situation for landings. The landing procedure is illustrated
in Figure 13. A switched vector ﬁeld, which represents velocity setpoints given to the
low-level controller in the body frame, is used to guide the drone to the landing pad.
The transitions in the vector ﬁeld are obtained from a combination of elevation angle and
height, as shown in the ﬂowchart of Figure 13. The direction and magnitude of the velocity
command for each action are shown in Table 1.
To summarize the procedure, if the drone is laterally distant enough from the platform,
as indicated by a small elevation angle, the ﬂight path obeys the sequence: a 45-degree
incline ascent, followed by a horizontal approach, which progresses to a 45-degree descent,
ending in a vertical descent. All horizontal movement is directed toward the landing
platform. This ﬂight path may shorten, lengthen, or skip one of these actions entirely,
depending on how close the TUAV is to the platform, both vertically and horizontally. The
transition elevation angles (ϕ1, ϕ2, ϕ3) and heights (h1, h2), as well as the command speeds
(V and Vd) are kept as parameters for tuning. Another observation is that, although the
proposed solution generates a discontinuous vector ﬁeld, to avoid steps in the desired
velocity given as a setpoint to the drone’s velocity controller, we linearly change the setpoint
when we switch from one phase to the next.
Table 1. Landing actions.
Action
vx [m s−1]
vy [m s−1]
vz [m s−1]
45° Ascent
−V cos α sin π
4
−V sin α sin π
4
V cos π
4
XY Approach
−V cos α
−V sin α
0
45° Descent
−V cos α sin π
4
−V sin α sin π
4
−V cos π
4
Vertical Descent
−Vd cos α
−Vd sin α
−V
Descent w/ P Control
−Vd cos α
−Vd sin α
−V h
h1
Landed/Disarm
0
0
0
[p.17]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
17 of 26
True
False
φd<φ1
True
False
φd<φ2
45o
ASCENT
XY
APPROACH
45o
DESCENT
False
φd<φ3
h>h1
True
VERTICAL
DESCENT
False
h>h2
False LANDED/
DISARM
DESCENT
W/ P
CONTROL
True
Elevation (φd),
Azimuth (αd),
and Height (h)
True
        -Lmax
0
Lmax
pX [m]
0
Lmax
pZ [m]
–
φ1
φ3
φ2
h1 h2
Figure 13. Proposed tether-guided landing approach. The vector ﬁeld on top shows the direction
of movement on the XZ plane (in the platform’s coordinate frame), limited by the maximum tether
length, Lmax. The complete 3D vector ﬁeld can be obtained by rotating this ﬁeld around the z-axis.
As shown in the ﬂowchart, the vector ﬁeld, although represented in the workspace, is constructed
only based on the drone elevation (ϕd) and azimuth (αd) angles, and the height of the vehicle (h).
Therefore, no localization is necessary. Ideally, the drone follows the actions sequentially until
landed: 45° ascent, horizontal approach, 45° descent, vertical descent, and vertical descent with P
control. The angles ϕ1, ϕ2, and ϕ3, and the heights h1 and h2 are thresholds that deﬁne the transition
between different actions.
5. Field Experiments and Results
This section presents a series of drone experiments conducted in laboratories and
mining facilities. These experiments were designed to illustrate and evaluate our system,
including mapping and landing approaches. Videos of some experiments can be found at
https://www.tinyurl.com/oxpeckeruav (accessed on 12 January 2023).
5.1. UAV Path Planning and Mapping
The path planning strategy described in Section 4.3 was implemented in ROS and
tested in a simulated scenario and on a DJI Matrice 100 drone. The latter served as a
software integration and testing proxy while the experimental drone hardware was being
integrated. Due to the inability to provide a source of odometry ground truth for the physical
experiments, our path-planning and mapping approaches were initially tested in a graphical
simulator for validation purposes. In one set of simulations, for example, we investigated the
impact of combining ranging information with INS and visual odometry [55]. Results from
these investigations are summarized in Table 2, where it is evident fusing more information to
visual odometry yields improvements in performance.
[p.18]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
18 of 26
Table 2. Error associated with different sources of odometry by implementing the path planning
strategy (simulator results).
Max Error (m)
Mean Error (m)
RMSE (m)
X
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
Visual Odom
0.558
0.779
0.188
0.177
0.405
0.095
0.074
0.180
0.072
Sensor Fusion Odom
0.178
0.162
0.071
0.035
0.067
0.050
0.032
0.067
0.050
Real-world mapping experiments were executed in the Safety Research Coal Mine
operated by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), located
in Pittsburgh, PA, in the U.S. A wall within the coal mine was surveyed autonomously
whilst executing the trajectory described in Section 4.3 and speciﬁed by the parameters
shown in Table 3. During the ﬂight, the drone’s computer saved data that were relevant
for mapping. These included RGB images, depth images, and odometry data, which
altogether generated approximately 18 MB s−1 (i.e., our 2 TB memory card could keep
up to 30 h of mapping data). In an effort to reduce the onboard computing cost, the 3D
map was created during post-processing using an RGB-D SLAM approach called real-time
appearance-based mapping (RTAB-Map) [63]. During post-processing, the primary front-
end odometry source was the T265, whereas RTAB-Map used the RGB and depth images
to detect loop closures in the back end. The challenge of detecting accurate loop closures in
subterranean environments was investigated in [61]. This information was combined with
speciﬁc parameters for RTAB-Map, which included extracting up to 500 visual features
per image and detecting a minimum of 20 visual features. This constraint ensures the
acceptance of only certain loop closures. A resulting map can be seen in Figure 14.
By observing the resulting map, it can be seen that the designed trajectory successfully
explored and mapped the entire wall. Figure 14a shows that there were no noticeable
gaps in the point cloud, indicating sufﬁcient overlap. Figure 14b shows that the left
and right edges were found. A video with some other experiments at the NIOSH Coal
Mine is available at https://www.tinyurl.com/oxpeckeruav (accessed on 12 January 2023).
Additional experiments and simulations that evaluate our coverage methodology can be
found in [61].
Table 3. Parameters used to create the lawnmower path and control the drone’s movement.
Parameter
Value
Speed
0.35 m/s
Rows
2
Dist. from Wall
1 m, 1.5 m
(a) Front view.
(b) Top view.
Figure 14. Typical map of a pillar. The drone collects the data by moving in a lawnmower pattern
in front of the pillar. When the edges of the wall are detected, the drone changes the height and
horizontal direction of movement.
[p.19]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
19 of 26
5.2. Landing
A series of experiments were performed to demonstrate the method described in
Section 4.4 and the tether management system. In these experiments, the TUAV started
from different relative positions with respect to the platform. The experiments were
conducted in a high bay facility. Figure 15 shows images from the experimental setup.
Figure 15a shows Oxpecker hovering above the UGV, with the tether fully extended and
taut. In Figure 15b, a sequence of overlaid snapshots shows the drone approaching and
landing on the platform on top of Rhino.
For the experiments shown in this section, the transition elevation angles were set
to ϕ1 = 65°, ϕ2 = 75°, ϕ3 = 85° and transition heights to h1 = 0.5 m, h2 = 0.2 m. The
command speed was set to V = 0.15 m s−1. Speed Vd was set to vary with the elevation
angle as
Vd =
π
2 −ϕ
π
2
.
(10)
Notice that this velocity is small for elevation angles close to 90° and is zero when the
elevation angle is exactly 90°.
(a) Taut tether.
(b) Landing sequence.
Figure 15. Typical tether-guided landing. The tether is made taut to help guide the drone back to the
landing platform carried by the UGV.
In Figures 16 and 17, we show an overview of one of the experiments conducted to
demonstrate the landing methodology. In Figure 16a, the drone executes three missions.
In “Mission Takeoff” (yellow trajectory), the drone takes off to a height of 0.8 m from
the platform. In “Mission Move” (cyan trajectory), the drone moves forward with a
setpoint speed of 0.15 m s−1 for 10 s and laterally and up for another 10 s. In “Mission Land”
(magenta trajectory), the drone receives zero speed setpoints for 2 s before starting the
landing procedure. In Figure 16b, we show the drone localization as given by the T265
sensor, the drone height obtained with the altimeter, and the tether length measured by our
system. The background colors represent the different missions described before. Notice
that when the altimeter is used for localization, it introduces discontinuities in the data.
In this example, the discontinuities appear when the drone leaves the platform, and the
altimeter starts measuring the distance to the ground and before landing when the reverse
sequence happens.
In Figure 16c, we show the tether tension during the entire experiment. During
the ﬁrst two missions (yellow and cyan backgrounds), the setpoint for the tether tension
is 0.3 N. During takeoff, although the controller is trying to release the cable faster to
decrease the tension, the drone moves up too fast, and a large peak in the tension occurs.
Once the drone starts hovering (around t = 30 s), the controller is able to adjust to the
tension setpoint. Conversely, during landing (magenta background), the drone moves
faster than the controller is able to retract the cable, causing the tension to drop below the
tension setpoint, which has been increased to help the landing. The landing methodology
[p.20]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
20 of 26
was tested successfully from 10 different starting positions. The results in Figure 16d
show the trajectories of the individual ﬂights using the localization solution from the T265
tracking camera.
(a) Drone trajectory.
(b) Drone position and tether length.
(c) Tether tension.
(d) Drone trajectories.
Figure 16. Landing experiment: (a) TUAV trajectory in a typical experiment; (b) drone localization
given by the T265 sensor, tether length measured by our system, and height given by a laser altimeter
during the landing shown in (a); (c) tether tension during the landing shown in (a); (d) trajectories of
several landings as seen by the T265 sensor.
Figure 17 shows the variables that control state transitions and the velocity setpoints
for different actions during a typical landing. The background colors in this ﬁgure match
the landing procedure colors in Figure 13. Notice that Oxpecker switches between “45°
descent” (green) and “vertical descent” (blue) until it gets very close to the landing spot,
as shown by the discontinuity in the measured height in Figure 17a. Once the altimeter
measures a height smaller than 0.5 m, it switches to the “descent w/P control” mode until
it reaches a height that triggers the “landed” command, which sends zero velocity and
disarms the drone.
[p.21]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
21 of 26
(a) Elevation angle and height.
(b) Tether variables.
Figure 17. Variables and drone inputs for the landing shown in Figure 16a. (a) Variables that control
the state transitions in Figure 13; (b) shows velocity commands sent to the drone and measured
velocity using the T265 sensor.
6. Conclusions
This paper presented the hardware and the software of a tether-powered UAV for
underground mining applications. This drone, called Oxpecker, was designed to work in
tandem with a UGV, which is responsible for hosting the batteries of the UAV, a landing
platform specially designed to allow for precise landing and safe UAV transportation, and
a tethering system that controls the tension of the tether and measures its azimuth and
elevation angles. The drone itself was constructed around higher voltage (42 V) motors to
avoid using voltage converters both on the UAV and on the UGV. Although this solution
was successful, we noticed an excessive power loss on the cable, which could be mitigated
by transmitting power at even higher voltages through the tether.
Regarding autonomy, the TUAV software relies on the low-level velocity controllers on
its Pixhawk controller, which is connected to the Intel® RealSense™T265 tracker sensor for
velocity estimation. Thus, our software for stone mine pillar surveys and precise landing,
described and demonstrated in the paper, sends velocity commands to the drone. In
contrast to previous work, for both tasks, instead of localizing the UAV using vision or even
the tether, which we also showed to be possible in our previous work [38], we developed
reactive approaches that only depend on instantaneous measurements given by the sensors.
For pillar surveys, the vehicle, based on LiDAR data, is controlled to follow the wall until
the wall edges are encountered. At this moment, the drone’s height is adjusted (based on
an altimeter) to create a lawnmower pattern in front of the wall. In the same spirit, for
landing, the angles of the tether measured on the vehicle are used to create a vector ﬁeld
that precisely guides the drone to its landing platform. Experiments that illustrate and
validate our strategies are presented in the paper.
This paper also describes a tether sensing and management system constructed based
on an electric winch and several sensors that measure the length of cable deployed, the
azimuth and elevation angles of the tether, and the tether tension. Given tension measure-
ments, a microcontroller is able to actuate the winch to adjust the tension to values that
will help the TUAV perform its tasks while simultaneously avoiding tangling and contact
between the tether and the ground. Although tether length and angles were not used by
the software presented in this paper, they are essential for tether-based localization [38].
Future work will include a complete and long-term evaluation of the system in actual
limestone mines. Although we have initial results in such mines (see the map of a pillar in
Figure 18), we never had the opportunity to test the complete robotic system in such an
environment. Regarding the hardware, the drone power system will require our attention.
We intend to abandon the idea of avoiding converters and add a DC-DC converter to
increase the voltage on the UGV and another to step this down on the TUAV. This will
allow for lighter cables, which can eventually compensate for the weight of the converter.
Moreover, we expect to reduce the power loss by at least ten times. We are currently
[p.22]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
22 of 26
working on developing software that uses a continuous vector ﬁeld for landing. We expect
this method to have fewer parameters to adjust than the current strategy and will also allow
the drone to land faster. We have recently implemented a localization system based on the
tether, but we are still relying on the T265 camera to provide the information needed by
Pixhawk to control the drone. Our future work will then integrate our localization system
into Oxpecker’s MCU. We believe this will increase the system’s robustness, especially in
very low-light conditions.
(a) Underground stone mine pillar.
(b) 3D map of the pillar face.
Figure 18. Stone mine pillar and 3D map of one of its faces obtained with a DJI M100 drone.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, B.M.R.J., R.R.L., K.S., J.R., J.N.G. and G.A.S.P.; methodol-
ogy, B.M.R.J., R.R.L., K.S., J.R., J.N.G. and G.A.S.P.; software, B.M.R.J., R.R.L., K.S., J.R. and G.A.S.P.;
validation, B.M.R.J., R.R.L., K.S., J.R. and G.A.S.P.; formal analysis, B.M.R.J., R.R.L. and G.A.S.P.;
investigation, B.M.R.J., R.R.L., K.S., J.R., J.N.G. and G.A.S.P.; resources, J.N.G. and G.A.S.P.; data
curation, B.M.R.J., R.R.L., K.S. and J.R.; writing—original draft preparation, B.M.R.J., R.R.L. and
G.A.S.P.; writing—review and editing, B.M.R.J., R.R.L., K.S., J.R., J.N.G. and G.A.S.P.; visualization,
B.M.R.J., R.R.L. and K.S.; supervision, J.N.G. and G.A.S.P.; project administration, J.N.G. and G.A.S.P.;
funding acquisition, J.N.G. and G.A.S.P. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Alpha Foundation for the Improvement of Mine Safety
and Health, Inc. (ALPHA FOUNDATION) grant number AFC820-69. The views, opinions, and
recommendations expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not imply any endorsement
by ALPHA FOUNDATION, its directors, and its staff.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank our collaborators on the research project, Ihsan
“Berk” Tulu, Yu Gu, and several WVU Robotics students. Special thanks go to Dylan Covell for
his participation in the design discussions and our collaborators in the stone mine and NIOSH’s
Safety Research Coal Mine and Experimental Mine. Bernardo Martinez Rocamora Jr. is a Statler
College fellow.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
GNSS
Global Navigation Satellite Systems
3D
Three Dimensional
VIO
Visual Inertial Odometry
LiDAR
Light Detection and Ranging
UAV
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
TUAV
Tethered Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
UGV
Unmanned Ground Vehicle
[p.23]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
23 of 26
ROS
Robot Operating System
ESC
Electronic Speed Controller
IMU
Inertial Measurement Unit
GPS
Global Positioning System
GLONASS
Global Navigation Satellite System
SSD
Solid-State Drive
MCU
Microcontroller Unit
EKF
Extended Kalman Filter
SLAM
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
V-SLAM
Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
PID
Proportional Integral Derivative
ADC
Analog to Digital Converter
FOV
Field of View
Appendix A. List of Components
Table A1 presents the list of commercially available components of Oxpecker.
Table A1. TUAV components—power and weight speciﬁcations.
Part Name
Manufacturer
Model
Quantity
Power (W)
Weight (g)
Quadrotor Frame
Holybro
X500
1
-
470
Brushless Motors
T-MOTOR
MN3520 KV400
4
680
888
Propellers
T-MOTOR
P12x4 Prop
4
-
58
Electronic Speed Controllers
T-MOTOR
FLAME HV 60A
4
-
294
Flight Management Unit
Holybro
Pixhawk 4
1
2.5
16
Power Management Board
Holybro
PM07
1
-
40
Telemetry Transmitter
Holybro
TT Radio V3 915 MHz
1
0.5
38
GPS Antenna
Holybro
Pixhawk 4 GPS Module
1
0.8
32
Companion Computer
Intel®
NUC11i5PAH (without case)
1
36
210
LiDAR Camera
Intel®
RealSense™L515
1
3.3
95
Tracking Camera
Intel®
RealSense™T265
1
1.5
55
UWB Transceiver Module
Decawave
DWM1001
1
0.3
-
Distance Measurement Sensor
Garmin
LidarLite3
1
0.7
22
Distance Measurement Sensor
Garmin
LidarLite4
1
0.7
22
Inertial Measurement Unit
Analog Devices
ADIS-16495 2BMLZ-ND
1
0.3
42
RC Receiver
Spektrum
AR620 DSMX 6-Channel
1
-
8
Microcontroller
Arduino
UNO R3
1
0.2
25
Flexible Wire (16AWG, 2 cond.)
BNTECHGO
-
15 m
-
570
References
1.
Said, K.O.; Onifade, M.; Githiria, J.M.; Abdulsalam, J.; Bodunrin, M.O.; Genc, B.; Johnson, O.; Akande, J.M. On the application of
drones: A progress report in mining operations. Int. J. Min. Reclam. Environ. 2021, 35, 235–267. [CrossRef]
2.
Shahmoradi, J.; Talebi, E.; Roghanchi, P.; Hassanalian, M. A comprehensive review of applications of drone technology in the
mining industry. Drones 2020, 4, 34. [CrossRef]
3.
Tong, X.; Liu, X.; Chen, P.; Liu, S.; Luan, K.; Li, L.; Liu, S.; Liu, X.; Xie, H.; Jin, Y.; et al. Integration of UAV-based photogrammetry
and terrestrial laser scanning for the three-dimensional mapping and monitoring of open-pit mine areas. Remote Sens. 2015,
7, 6635–6662. [CrossRef]
4.
Kim, D.P.; Kim, S.B.; Back, K.S. Analysis of Mine Change Using 3D Spatial Information Based on Drone Image. Sustainability
2022, 14, 3433. [CrossRef]
5.
Ge, L.; Li, X.; Ng, A.H.M. UAV for mining applications: A case study at an open-cut mine and a longwall mine in New South
Wales, Australia. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), Beijing,
China, 10–15 July 2016; pp. 5422–5425.
6.
Battulwar, R.; Winkelmaier, G.; Valencia, J.; Naghadehi, M.Z.; Peik, B.; Abbasi, B.; Parvin, B.; Sattarvand, J. A practical
methodology for generating high-resolution 3D models of open-pit slopes using UAVs: Flight path planning and optimization.
Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 2283. [CrossRef]
7.
Padró, J.C.; Cardozo, J.; Montero, P.; Ruiz-Carulla, R.; Alcañiz, J.M.; Serra, D.; Carabassa, V. Drone-based identiﬁcation of erosive
processes in open-pit mining restored areas. Land 2022, 11, 212. [CrossRef]
[p.24]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
24 of 26
8.
Herrmann, E.; Jackisch, R.; Zimmermann, R.; Gloaguen, R.; Lünich, K.; Kieschnik, L. Drone-borne spectral monitoring of
post-mining areas. Geophys. Res. Abstr. 2019, 21, EGU2019-15001.
9.
Turner, R.; Bhagwat, N.; Galayda, L.; Knoll, C.; Russell, E.; MacLaughlin, M. Geotechnical Characterization of Underground
Mine Excavations from UAV-Captured Photogrammetric & Thermal Imagery. In Proceedings of the 52nd US Rock Mechan-
ics/Geomechanics Symposium, Seattle, WA, USA, 17–20 June 2018; OnePetro: Richardson, TX, USA, 2018.
10.
Russell, E.A.; MacLaughlin, M.; Turner, R. UAV-based geotechnical modeling and mapping of an inaccessible underground
site. In Proceedings of the 52nd US Rock Mechanics/Geomechanics Symposium, Seattle, WA, USA, 17–20 June 2018; OnePetro:
Richardson, TX, USA, 2018.
11.
Dunnington, L.; Nakagawa, M. Fast and safe gas detection from underground coal ﬁre by drone ﬂy over. Environ. Pollut. 2017,
229, 139–145. [CrossRef]
12.
De Petrillo, M.; Beard, J.; Gu, Y.; Gross, J.N. Search planning of a uav/ugv team with localization uncertainty in a subterranean
environment. IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag. 2021, 36, 6–16. [CrossRef]
13.
De Croon, G.; De Wagter, C. Challenges of autonomous ﬂight in indoor environments. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Madrid, Spain, 1–5 October 2018; pp. 1003–1009.
14.
Azpúrua, H.; Saboia, M.; Freitas, G.M.; Clark, L.; Agha-mohammadi, A.a.; Pessin, G.; Campos, M.F.; Macharet, D.G. A Survey on
the autonomous exploration of conﬁned subterranean spaces: Perspectives from real-word and industrial robotic deployments.
Robot. Auton. Syst. 2023, 160, 104304. [CrossRef]
15.
Chowdhary, G.; Johnson, E.N.; Magree, D.; Wu, A.; Shein, A. GPS-denied indoor and outdoor monocular vision aided navigation
and control of unmanned aircraft. J. Field Robot. 2013, 30, 415–438. [CrossRef]
16.
Cviši´c, I.; ´Cesi´c, J.; Markovi´c, I.; Petrovi´c, I. SOFT-SLAM: Computationally efﬁcient stereo visual simultaneous localization and
mapping for autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles. J. Field Robot. 2018, 35, 578–595. [CrossRef]
17.
Ebadi, K.; Bernreiter, L.; Biggie, H.; Catt, G.; Chang, Y.; Chatterjee, A.; Denniston, C.E.; Deschênes, S.P.; Harlow, K.;
Khattak, S.; et al. Present and future of slam in extreme underground environments. arXiv 2022, arXiv:2208.01787.
18.
Zhang, J.; Singh, S. Low-drift and real-time lidar odometry and mapping. Auton. Robot. 2017, 41, 401–416. [CrossRef]
19.
Khattak, S.; Mascarich, F.; Dang, T.; Papachristos, C.; Alexis, K. Robust thermal-inertial localization for aerial robots: A case for
direct methods. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Atlanta, GA,
USA, 11–14 June 2019; pp. 1061–1068.
20.
Quigley, M.; Gerkey, B.; Conley, K.; Faust, J.; Foote, T.; Leibs, J.; Berger, E.; Wheeler, R.; Ng, A. ROS: An open-source Robot
Operating System. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) Workshop on Open
Source Robotics, Kobe, Japan, 12–17 May 2009.
21.
Neumann, T.; Ferrein, A.; Kallweit, S.; Scholl, I. Towards a mobile mapping robot for underground mines. In Proceedings of the
2014 PRASA, RobMech and AfLaT International Joint Symposium, Cape Town, South Africa, 27–28 November 2014; pp. 27–28.
22.
Gill, P.S.; Hatﬁeld, M.C.; Randle, D.; Wies, R.; Ganguli, R.; Rosetti, S.; Vanderwaal, S. Team of Unmanned Aircraft Systems
(UAS) and Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGV) for Emergency Response in Mining Applications. In Proceedings of the 51st
AIAA/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference, Orlando, FL, USA, 27–29 July 2015; p. 4111.
23.
Tranzatto, M.; Miki, T.; Dharmadhikari, M.; Bernreiter, L.; Kulkarni, M.; Mascarich, F.; Andersson, O.; Khattak, S.; Hutter, M.;
Siegwart, R.; et al. CERBERUS in the DARPA Subterranean Challenge. Sci. Robot. 2022, 7, eabp9742. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Hudson, N.; Talbot, F.; Cox, M.; Williams, J.; Hines, T.; Pitt, A.; Wood, B.; Frousheger, D.; Surdo, K.L.; Molnar, T.; et al.
Heterogeneous Ground and Air Platforms, Homogeneous Sensing: Team CSIRO Data61’s Approach to the DARPA Subterranean
Challenge. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2104.09053.
25.
Best, G.; Garg, R.; Keller, J.; Hollinger, G.A.; Scherer, S. Resilient Multi-Sensor Exploration of Multifarious Environments with a
Team of Aerial Robots. In Proceedings of the Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), New York, NY, USA, 27 June–1 July 2022.
26.
Agha, A.; Otsu, K.; Morrell, B.; Fan, D.D.; Thakker, R.; Santamaria-Navarro, A.; Kim, S.K.; Bouman, A.; Lei, X.; Edlund, J.; et al.
Nebula: Quest for robotic autonomy in challenging environments; team costar at the darpa subterranean challenge. arXiv 2021,
arXiv:2103.11470.
27.
Rouˇcek, T.; Pecka, M.; ˇCížek, P.; Petˇríˇcek, T.; Bayer, J.; Šalansk`y, V.; Azayev, T.; Heˇrt, D.; Petrlík, M.; Báˇca, T.; et al. System for
multi-robotic exploration of underground environments CTU-CRAS-NORLAB in the DARPA Subterranean Challenge. arXiv
2021, arXiv:2110.05911.
28.
Ohradzansky, M.T.; Rush, E.R.; Riley, D.G.; Mills, A.B.; Ahmad, S.; McGuire, S.; Biggie, H.; Harlow, K.; Miles, M.J.; Frew, E.W.;
et al. Multi-agent autonomy: Advancements and challenges in subterranean exploration. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2110.04390.
29.
De Petris, P.; Nguyen, H.; Dharmadhikari, M.; Kulkarni, M.; Khedekar, N.; Mascarich, F.; Alexis, K. RMF-owl: A collision-tolerant
ﬂying robot for autonomous subterranean exploration. arXiv 2022, arXiv:2202.11055.
30.
Flyability. Elios 3—Digitizing the Inaccessible. 2022. Available online: https://info.ﬂyability.com/elios-3-inspection-drone
(accessed on 12 January 2023).
31.
De Petris, P.; Khattak, S.; Dharmadhikari, M.; Waibel, G.; Nguyen, H.; Montenegro, M.; Khedekar, N.; Alexis, K.; Hutter, M.
Marsupial Walking-and-Flying Robotic Deployment for Collaborative Exploration of Unknown Environments. arXiv 2022,
arXiv:2205.05477.
[p.25]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
25 of 26
32.
Papachristos, C.; Tzes, A. The power-tethered UAV-UGV team: A collaborative strategy for navigation in partially-mapped envi-
ronments. In Proceedings of the 22nd IEEE Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation, Palermo, Italy, 31 May–2 June
2014; pp. 1153–1158.
33.
Walendziuk, W.; Oldziej, D.; Slowik, M. Power supply system analysis for tethered drones application. In Proceedings of the
2020 IEEE International Conference Mechatronic Systems and Materials (MSM), Bialystok, Poland, 1–3 July 2020; pp. 1–6.
34.
Jain, K.P.; Kotaru, P.; de Sa, M.; Mueller, M.W.; Sreenath, K. Tethered Power Supply for Quadcopters: Architecture, Analysis and
Experiments. arXiv 2022, arXiv:2203.08180.
35.
Lee, D.; Zhou, J.; Lin, W.T. Autonomous battery swapping system for quadcopter. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Denver, CO, USA, 9–12 June 2015; pp. 118–124.
36.
Alyassi, R.; Khonji, M.; Karapetyan, A.; Chau, S.C.K.; Elbassioni, K.; Tseng, C.M. Autonomous recharging and ﬂight mission
planning for battery-operated autonomous drones. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 2022.. [CrossRef]
37.
Boukoberine, M.N.; Zhou, Z.; Benbouzid, M. Power supply architectures for drones-a review. In Proceedings of the IECON
2019-45th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, Lisbon, Portugal, 14–17 October 2019; Volume 1,
pp. 5826–5831.
38.
Lima, R.R.; Pereira, G.A. On the Development of a Tether-based Drone Localization System. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Athens, Greece, 15–18 June 2021; pp. 195–201.
39.
Al-Radaideh, A.; Sun, L. Observability Analysis and Bayesian Filtering for Self-Localization of a Tethered Multicopter in
GPS-Denied Environments. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS),
Atlanta, GA, USA, 11–14 June 2019; pp. 1041–1047.
40.
Borgese, A.; Guastella, D.C.; Sutera, G.; Muscato, G. Tether-Based Localization for Cooperative Ground and Aerial Vehicles.
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2022, 7, 8162–8169. [CrossRef]
41.
Alarcón, F.; García, M.; Maza, I.; Viguria, A.; Ollero, A. A Precise and GNSS-Free Landing System on Moving Platforms for
Rotary-Wing UAVs. Sensors 2019, 19, 886. [CrossRef]
42.
Al-Radaideh, A.; Sun, L. Self-Localization of Tethered Drones without a Cable Force Sensor in GPS-Denied Environments. Drones
2021, 5, 135. [CrossRef]
43.
Xiao, X.; Fan, Y.; Dufek, J.; Murphy, R. Indoor UAV Localization Using a Tether. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International
Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR), Philadelphia, PA, USA, 6–8 August 2018; pp. 1–6.
44.
Chang, C.W.; Lo, L.Y.; Cheung, H.C.; Feng, Y.; Yang, A.S.; Wen, C.Y.; Zhou, W. Proactive Guidance for Accurate UAV Landing on
a Dynamic Platform: A Visual–Inertial Approach. Sensors 2022, 22, 404. [CrossRef]
45.
Wang, J.; Wang, T.; He, Z.; Cai, W.; Sun, C. Towards better generalization in quadrotor landing using deep reinforcement learning.
Appl. Intell. 2022, 1–19. . [CrossRef]
46.
Keipour, A.; Pereira, G.A.; Bonatti, R.; Garg, R.; Rastogi, P.; Dubey, G.; Scherer, S. Visual Servoing Approach to Autonomous UAV
Landing on a Moving Vehicle. Sensors 2022, 22, 6549. [CrossRef]
47.
Gonçalves, V.M.; McLaughlin, R.; Pereira, G.A. Precise landing of autonomous aerial vehicles using vector ﬁelds. IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett. 2020, 5, 4337–4344. [CrossRef]
48.
Alarcón, F.; Santamaría, D.; Viguria, A.; Ollero, A.; Heredia, G. Helicopter GNC System for Autonomous Landing by Using a
Tether in a GPS Denied Scenario. In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS),
Denver, CO, USA, 9–12 June 2015; pp. 1067–1073.
49.
Oh, S.R.; Pathak, K.; Agrawal, S.K.; Pota, H.R.; Garratt, M. Approaches for a Tether-guided Landing of an Autonomous Hlicopter.
IEEE Trans. Robot. 2006, 22, 536–544.
50.
Mﬁri, J.T.; Treurnicht, J.; Engelbrecht, J.A.A. Automated Landing of a Tethered Quad-rotor UAV with Constant Winching Force. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Pattern Recognition Association of South Africa and Robotics and Mechatronics International Conference
(PRASA-RobMech), Stellenbosch, South Africa, 30 November–2 December 2016; pp. 1–6.
51.
Mulgaonkar, Y.; Whitzer, M.; Morgan, B.; Kroninger, C.M.; Harrington, A.M.; Kumar, V. Power and weight considerations in
small, agile quadrotors. In Proceedings of the Micro-and Nanotechnology Sensors, Systems, and Applications VI, Baltimore, MD,
USA, 5–9 May 2014; SPIE: Bellingham, WA, USA, 2014; Volume 9083, pp. 376–391.
52.
Foehn, P.; Kaufmann, E.; Romero, A.; Penicka, R.; Sun, S.; Bauersfeld, L.; Laengle, T.; Ciofﬁ, G.; Song, Y.; Loquercio, A.; et al.
Agilicious: Open-source and open-hardware agile quadrotor for vision-based ﬂight. Sci. Robot. 2022, 7, eabl6259. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
53.
Koubâa, A.; Allouch, A.; Alajlan, M.; Javed, Y.; Belghith, A.; Khalgui, M. Micro air vehicle link (mavlink) in a nutshell: A survey.
IEEE Access 2019, 7, 87658–87680. [CrossRef]
54.
Ermakov, V. MAVROS. 2020. Available online: https://github.com/mavlink/mavros (accessed on 12 January 2023).
55.
Samarakoon, K.Y. UAV Path Planning and Multi-Modal Localization for Mapping in a Subterranean Environment. Master’s
Thesis, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA, 2022.
56.
Sivaneri, V.O.; Gross, J.N. UGV-to-UAV cooperative ranging for robust navigation in GNSS-challenged environments. Aerosp. Sci.
Technol. 2017, 71, 245–255. [CrossRef]
57.
Clarke, J.; Mills, S. Sensor Evaluation for Voxel-Based RGB-D SLAM. In Proceedings of the 2021 36th IEEE International
Conference on Image and Vision Computing New Zealand (IVCNZ), Tauranga, New Zealand, 8–10 December 2021; pp. 1–6.
[p.26]
Drones 2023, 7, 73
26 of 26
58.
Denavit, J.; Hartenberg, R.S. A kinematic notation for lower-pair mechanisms based on matrices. J. Appl. Mech. 1955, 22, 215–221.
[CrossRef]
59.
Li, Y.; Chen, H.; Er, M.J.; Wang, X. Coverage path planning for UAVs based on enhanced exact cellular decomposition method.
Mechatronics 2011, 21, 876–885. [CrossRef]
60.
Avellar, G.S.; Pereira, G.A.; Pimenta, L.C.; Iscold, P. Multi-UAV routing for area coverage and remote sensing with minimum
time. Sensors 2015, 15, 27783–27803. [CrossRef]
61.
Samarakoon, K.Y.; Pereira, G.A.; Gross, J.N. Impact of the Trajectory on the Performance of RGB-D SLAM Executed by a UAV in
a Subterranean Environment. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS),
Dubrovnik, Croatia, 21–24 June 2022; pp. 812–820.
62.
He, J.; Li, Y.; Zhang, K. Research of UAV ﬂight planning parameters. Positioning 2012, 4, 43–45. [CrossRef]
63.
Labbé, M.; Michaud, F. RTAB-Map as an open-source lidar and visual simultaneous localization and mapping library for
large-scale and long-term online operation. J. Field Robot. 2019, 36, 416–446. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
=== END ===
