warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_0369.pdf
sha256: 23B1B75ED0BCCAB988E5F4930F31C1A3309C5AEA3895E3982C03E940C236FF29
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 12
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
6392
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
Autonomous Flight Control of a Nano Quadrotor
Helicopter in a GPS-Denied Environment
Using On-Board Vision
Xu Zhang, Bin Xian, Senior Member, IEEE, Bo Zhao, and Yao Zhang
Abstract—In this paper, a nano quadrotor helicopter
which weighs about only 45 grams and has a diameter
less than 0.15 m is employed for the autonomous ﬂight
control development in GPS-denied environments. Due to
the very limited payload ability of the helicopter, a micro
onboard vision system is designed to provide visual pose
measurement. Then the attitude data obtained from a low
cost micro inertial measurement unit (IMU) are fused with
the visual measurement to provide accurate estimation of
the helicopter’s translational position and velocity. Non-
linear ﬂight controller is designed to hold the quadrotor
in a certain position and altitude without external ground
motion capture system. Moreover, trajectory tracking ability
is achieved with the help of a modiﬁed visual simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM) algorithm. Experimental
results are included to demonstrate the good hovering and
tracking control performance of the proposed design in
GPS-denied indoor and outdoor environments. To our best
knowledge, few of previous works have demonstrated au-
tonomous control ability of a quadrotor helicopter weighs
less than 50 grams without the help of external ground
motion capture system in GPS-denied indoor and outdoor
environments.
Index Terms—Nano quadrotor, robust control, UAV, vi-
sual control.
I. INTRODUCTION
A
CCORDING to the classiﬁcation criteria deﬁned in [1],
a nano UAV is a vehicle that weighs less than 0.4 lbs
or 180 grams. Due to its super advantages such as safety,
agility, silent operation, and so on, the nano UAV or μAV
is a fast developing branch of unmanned aerial vehicles [2].
In 2005, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) announced the nano air vehicle (NAV) program. This
program’s goal was deﬁned as small unmanned air vehicle that
would sustain continuous hovering and forward ﬂying, and be
able to perform indoor and outdoor missions, while having
Manuscript
received
March
3,
2014; revised
June 11,
2014,
September 2, 2014, and January 17, 2015; accepted March 9, 2015.
Date of publication April 6, 2015; date of current version September 9,
2015. This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of
Tianjin (Grant 14JCZDJC31900).
The authors are with the Institute of Robotics and Autonomous
System, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Process Measurement and Control,
School of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Tianjin University,
Tianjin 300072, China (e-mail: xbin@tju.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TIE.2015.2420036
a size under 0.075 m, and a total mass under 10 grams. In
2011, AeroVironment unveiled the Nano Hummingbird UAV
[3], which had a ﬂapping-wing conﬁguration with a mass of
19 grams and wingspan of 0.165 m. Without any ego-motion
estimation capacity, this Nano Hummingbird UAV has to be
manipulated by a skilled human pilot. Prox Dynamics Inc.
developed a nano unmanned helicopter named Black Hornet
[4], it measured about 0.1 × 0.025 m and weighed around
16 grams. Black Hornet can be controlled with the help of
GPS signals for outdoor missions. For the aforementioned nano
UAVs, most of them lack the autonomous ﬂight ability in
GPS-denied indoor and outdoor environments without using of
external ground motion capture systems.
Comparing to the ﬂapping-wing aircraft and other conﬁgura-
tions, quadrotor UAV is simple in mechanism, and its four iden-
tical rotors are the only moving parts onboard. The simplicity in
mechanism is a tradeoff with the dependency of sophisticated
ﬂight controller. Thanks to the rapid development of sensor
technology and micro processors, a full set of onboard inertial
navigation system (INS) sensors can now be integrated into a
tiny chip weighing only several milligrams. Based on the above
discussion, we believe that a tiny nano quadrotor is a more
suitable conﬁguration for nano UAV or μAV.
Some research works have been conducted on the hovering
ﬂight control of quadrotor UAVs. However, till now most of
them have been performed on quadrotor UAVs that typically
weigh more than 500 grams and few studies have been done
for the control of nano quadrotor UAVs which have a mass less
than 50 grams. In this paper, our interest is the stable hovering
and trajectory tracking control design for a nano quadrotor UAV
which has a net weight about 45 grams with a payload ability
of 15 grams, as shown in Fig. 1.
The limited payload ability and size of the nano quadrotor
UAV bring great challenges to the ﬂight control development.
Most of the existing onboard localization and navigation de-
vices are not suitable for the nano quadrotor UAV, such as
the Global Position System (GPS) unit and laser range ﬁnders.
Fig. 1 shows the comparison between a Hokuyo URG-04 laser
range ﬁnder, PX4FLOW optical ﬂow sensor and the nano
quadrotor employed in our research. Taking the payload ability
of the nano quadrotor helicopter into consideration, vision
based onboard sensing system will be an effective method to
provide motion estimation.
Visual servo algorithms have been extensively developed in
the robotics ﬁeld over the last decade [5]. For visual servoing,
0278-0046 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.2]
ZHANG et al.: FLIGHT CONTROL OF A NANO QUADROTOR HELICOPTER IN A GPS-DENIED ENVIRONMENT
6393
Fig. 1. Setup of the nano quadrotor helicopter comparing to laser range
ﬁnder URG-04LX and optical ﬂow sensor PX4FLOW.
feedback information extracted from a vision sensor is used to
control the motion of a robot. However, artiﬁcial markers or
feature points are needed in visual servo algorithms, making
this method only suitable for ground target tracking [6] or
position-hold hovering [7].
In the early approaches to the localization and navigation
problems in GPS denied environments, many researchers have
taken advantage of optical ﬂow based control methods [8]. This
biomimetic method does not need a great number of computa-
tions or artiﬁcial land marks placed in the environment [9]. In
recent years, fast growing embedded computational capabilities
make onboard optical ﬂow calculation possible for practical
ﬂight control. In [10], an open source high speed optical ﬂow
sensor PX4FLOW is introduced, and it weighs around 20 grams
which is relatively tiny comparing to regular size quadrotor, but
it is still too heavy to be mounted on our 45 grams quadrotor
as shown in Fig. 1. The major drawback of optical ﬂow based
approach is that the integration of the translational velocity will
lead to an unacceptable position estimation drift.
Compared to the vision-based algorithms mentioned above,
visual simultaneous localization and mapping (VSLAM) is a
more promising solution to GPS-denied navigation [11], [12].
This VSLAM approach can provide almost drift-free pose
estimation in an unknown environment without the aid of any
external localization system, beacons or artiﬁcial features.
The quadrotor helicopter is a typical underactuated non-
linear system. Recently, the control design for underactuated
mechatronic system has drawn great attention. In [13], an
energy-based approach was employed to design a regulation
controller for an underactuated overhead crane system. In [14],
the dynamics of an underactuated offshore boom crane was
analyzed and a nonlinear tracking controller was proposed.
In [15], robust compensator approaches were combined with
linear feedback control design to formulate robust regulation
and tracking controller for a class of underactuated laboratory
helicopter setup.
Our nano quadrotor helicopter is equipped with a micro
wireless monocular camera, a low-cost IMU, a micro ﬂight
control board as the main avionic devices. The images are
transferred from the onboard camera to the ground station
through wireless communication, and estimation for the pose
of the helicopter is obtained via a modiﬁed visual SLAM
algorithm. To improve the accuracy of position estimation, the
IMU data are fused with the raw visual measurement using a
Kalman ﬁlter [16]. To increase the robustness with respect to
external disturbance and modeling uncertainties, a nonlinear
robust feedback methodology is used to formulate the ﬂight
controller. Real-time ﬂight tests have been carried out to verify
the hovering and tracking control performance of the proposed
design in GPS-denied indoor and outdoor environments. To
our best knowledge, few of previous works have reported the
autonomous control ability of a nano UAV which weighs less
than 50 grams in GPS-denied indoor and outdoor environments,
and does not require any help from an external ground motion
capture system.
This paper is organized as follows. The overview of our
nano quadrotor helicopter setup and control development is
presented in Section II. The motion estimation based on the
onboard vision system is presented in Section III. Experimental
results for the validation of the proposed design are given in
Section IV. Finally, some conclusion remarks are presented in
Section V.
II. FLIGHT CONTROL DEVELOPMENT
In this section, the position and attitude control algorithm
is designed for the nano quadrotor helicopter. Inspired by
the work in [17], an inner-loop-outer-loop control structure is
utilized for the ﬂight control development. Based on the rigid
body dynamic model of the nano quadrotor, a PID controller is
designed for the inner-loop (or the attitude loop) control, and a
robust nonlinear position controller is developed for the outer-
loop (or the position loop) control. A linear attitude dynamics
model is obtained via system identiﬁcation technique to provide
a base for the numerical simulation and control gains tuning.
A. Nano Quadrotor Helicopter Setup
For our research work, a self-built nano quadrotor helicopter
is used. Fig. 1 shows the setup of the vehicle. Its diameter
is 0.15 m and weighs about 45 grams. The maximum ﬂight
endurance is approximately 8 minutes with a 3.7 V 500 mAh
Li-Po battery which weighs 10 grams. Based on its lightweight
carbon ﬁber body frame and efﬁcient propelling system, sufﬁ-
cient payload capacity is obtained for onboard avionic devices.
Despite its tiny size, this vehicle contains a full suite of onboard
avionic devices. A customized 32-bits microcontroller board
which is integrated with low cost IMU is used as the onboard
autopilot board. The onboard low cost IMU consists of linear
acceleration, angular velocity and magnetic sensors. A wireless
monocular video camera which weighs about 3 grams is se-
lected as the onboard vision sensor. A telemetry radio device
which weighs about 1.9 grams is utilized to provide communi-
cation between the quadrotor helicopter and the ground station
(Table I).
The host-based system conﬁguration of our testbed is illus-
trated in Fig. 2. The attitude data of the quadrotor helicopter is
measured by the onboard IMU, the altitude of the quadrotor is
measured via a micro onboard barometer. The micro wireless
camera points directly down and transmits video information
to a laptop computer which is employed as the ground station
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.3]
6394
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
TABLE I
COMPONENTS OF THE NANO QUADROTOR
Fig. 2. System architecture.
and runs a Linux operation system. The ground control soft-
ware is implemented via C language coding, and the open-
source robot operating system Robot Operating System (ROS)
[18] is utilized as the middleware. The visual pose estimation
algorithm is implemented on the ground station to provide
translational position and velocity estimation for the quadrotor,
then these data are sent to the onboard autopilot board of the
quadrotor via wireless modem. The onboard autopilot board
fuses visual position information with inertial sensor readings
to get a more accurate pose estimation for the control algorithm.
Both the attitude control algorithm and the position algorithm
are implemented on the onboard autopilot board. In the case of
any failure, an immediate switch to manual control is possible
to land the helicopter.
B. Dynamic Model
The quadrotor helicopter has four rotors which can generate
four identical thrusts denoted by fi(t), i = 1, 2, 3, 4, respec-
tively. The thrusts are related with the motor speed via
fi = bΩ2
i
(1)
where b denotes a constant speed-to-force coefﬁcient, and Ωi
for i = 1, 2, 3, 4, represents the spin rate of the motors on the
quadrotor helicopter. More details about the ﬂight properties
of a quadrotor UAV can be found in [19]–[21]. To describe
the kinematics of the quadrotor, let I = {xI, yI, zI} represent
a right hand inertia frame with zI being the vertical direc-
tion to the earth. The body ﬁxed frame is denoted by B =
{xB, yB, zB}. The Euclidean position of the UAV with respect
to I is represented by P(t) = [x(t) y(t) z(t)]T ∈R3, and the
Euler angle of the UAV with respect to I is represented by
Θ(t) = [φ(t) θ(t) ψ(t)]T ∈R3. The rotation matrix from B to
I is represented by R ∈R3×3 as follows [19]:
R =
⎡
⎣
cφcθ
sφsθcψ −sψcφ
cφsθcψ + sψsφ
sφcθ
sφsθsψ + cψcφ
cφsθsψ −cψsφ
−sθ
cθsφ
cθcφ
⎤
⎦. (2)
The translational and rotational kinematic equations with re-
spect to the inertial frame I are given by

v
ω

=

RT
03×3
03×3
T −1
 
˙P
˙Θ

(3)
where
v(t) = [v1(t)
v2(t)
v3(t)]T ∈R3
and
ω(t) =
[ω1(t) ω2(t) ω3(t)]T ∈R3 denote the linear velocity and
angular velocity of the UAV with respect to the inertial frame
I expressed in the body ﬁxed frame B, the velocity transfer
matrix T (Θ) ∈R3×3 is given by
T =
⎡
⎣
1
sφtθ
cφtθ
0
cφ
−sφ
0
sφ/cθ
cφ/cθ
⎤
⎦.
(4)
The following dynamic model of a quadrotor UAV [22], [23]
is considered for our control development purpose:
m ¨P + Π1 ˙P + G = B1u1
J ¨Θ + Π2 ˙Θ = B2

u2
u3
u4
	T
(5)
where m ∈R represents the mass of the quadrotor, J =
diag{[J1 J2 J3]T } ∈R3×3 denotes a positive deﬁnite diagonal
inertia matrix, G = [0 0 mg]T is a gravity vector with g
being the acceleration of gravity. The input u1(t) ∈R pro-
vides the lift force and [u2(t) u3(t) u4(t)]T ∈R3 creates the
rotation torque in the roll, pitch and yaw direction. They are
linked to the quadrotor’s dynamics via the input gain ma-
trix B1 = [cψsθcφ + sψsφ sψsθcφ −cψsφ cφcθ]T and B2 =
diag{[l
l
c]T } with l denoting the distance between the
epicenter of the UAV and the rotor axes, c being a con-
stant force-to-moment coefﬁcient. The damping matrix K1
and K2 are deﬁned as Π1 = diag{[k1 k2 k3]T } and Π2 =
diag{[k4l k5l k6]T } where ki for i = 1, 2, . . ., 6 are some
positive damping coefﬁcients. The control inputs u1, u2, u3 and
u4 in (5) can be computed from the propeller’s thrusts via
u1 = f1 + f2 + f3 + f4
u2 = −f1 −f2 + f3 + f4
u3 = −f1 + f2 + f3 −f4
u4 = f1 −f2 + f3 −f4.
(6)
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.4]
ZHANG et al.: FLIGHT CONTROL OF A NANO QUADROTOR HELICOPTER IN A GPS-DENIED ENVIRONMENT
6395
Fig. 3. Overall structure of the nonlinear inner-loop and outer-loop control system for the nano quadrotor helicopter.
C. Design of the Controller
In this paper, the system output is selected as the nano
helicopter’s position and yaw angle, denoted by η(t) =
[x(t) y(t) z(t) ψ(t)]T , and the control objective is to let the
nano quadrotor helicopter track some desired trajectory denoted
by ηd(t) = [xd(t) yd(t) zd(t) ψd(t)]T . The translational posi-
tion x(t) and y(t) are obtained via motion estimation system
based on visual measurement feedback which will be intro-
duced later, and the vertical position feedback z(t) is obtained
from the onboard barometer sensor. Inspired by the work in
[17], [24], and [25], an inner-and-outer-loop control structure
is utilized. A PID controller is designed for the inner-loop (atti-
tude loop), and a nonlinear robust controller is designed for the
outer-loop (position loop). The overall control structure is given
in Fig. 3. The commanded attitude angles [φd θd]T and their
time-derivatives are calculated by the outer-loop controller.
Details of the control development can be found in [17],
[25], and here we provide the control formulation directly. The
ﬁrst entry in (5) represents the translational dynamics of the
quadrotor. Considering the fact that damping coefﬁcients k1, k2
and k3 in the matrix Π1 are with some quite small values, their
effects can be omitted [17], and a simpliﬁed dynamic model for
the quadrotor’s translational motion can be obtained as follows:
¨P = 1
m (B1(φ, θ, ψ)u1 −G) .
(7)
In the case that the quadrotor reaches its desired trajectory of
ηd(t) = [xd(t) yd(t) zd(t) ψd(t)]T , we will have
¨Pd = 1
m (B1(φd, θd, ψd)u1 −G) .
(8)
Based on the structure of (8), we deﬁne the auxiliary signal
vector μ(t) = [μx(t) μy(t) μz(t)]T as follows:
μ = ¨Pd
= 1
m (B1(φd, θd, ψd)u1 −G) .
(9)
Here, μ(t) corresponds to the desired acceleration vector or the
virtual position control vector that will be designed later.
Since our nano quadrotor helicopter weighs only about
45 grams, it is very sensitive to external disturbance, such as
strong air ﬂow. Our previous work has shown that PID based
controller cannot achieve good position control performance,
even though it has been widely used in the position control
of normal size quadrotor helicopters which weigh more than
300 grams. To improve the robustness of the ﬂight controller, a
high performance control design is developed for the outer-loop
(position loop) by utilizing the robust nonlinear feedback con-
trol design technique which was proposed in [24], and further
developed in [26]. This kind of nonlinear control methodology,
which is named as RISE (robust integral of the signum of the
error) feedback control, has fewer requirements for the dynamic
model knowledge and preserves good robustness with respect
to structural/non-structural uncertainties and non-vanishing ex-
ternal disturbance. Let the position tracking error signals be
designed as
ex1 = xd −x
ey1 = yd −y
ez1 = zd −z
(10)
with xd(t), yd(t) and zd(t) denoting the time-varying refer-
ence trajectory in the x-direction, y-direction and z-direction,
respectively. To facilitate the subsequent control design, the
following auxiliary error signals are introduced:
ex2 = ex1 + αx ˙ex1
ey2 = ey1 + αy ˙ey1
ez2 = ez1 + αz ˙ez1
(11)
where αx, αy and αz are some positive gains. Following the
similar steps in [24], the position controller μ(t) is designed as
μx = ksxex2 +
t

0
(ksxαxex2(τ) + βxsgn (ex2(τ))) dτ
μy = ksyey2 +
t

0
(ksyαyey2(τ) + βysgn (ey2(τ))) dτ
μz = kszez2 +
t

0
(kszαzez2(τ) + βzsgn (ez2(τ))) dτ
(12)
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.5]
6396
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
where ksx, ksy, ksz, βx, βy and βz are positive gains, and sgn(·)
denotes the standard signum function.
By recalling the deﬁnition of B1(·) and G, the elements of
μ(t) in (9) are given by
μx = 1
mu1(cos φd sin θd cos ψd + sin φd sin ψd)
μy = 1
mu1(cos φd sin θd sin ψd −sin φd cos ψd)
μz = 1
mu1 cos φd cos θd −g.
(13)
Based on (13), the actual input u1(t) and the commanded
attitude angles [φd θd]T can be solved as follows:
u1 = m

μ2
x + μ2
y + (μz + g)2 1
2
φd = sin−1

 m
u1
(μx sin ψd −μy cos ψd)

θd = tan−1

μx cos ψd + μy sin ψd
μz + g

(14)
where the virtual outer-loop (position loop) control vector μ(t)
has been designed in (12).
The inner-loop (attitude loop) control input signals u2(t),
u3(t), and u4(t) in (5) are designed as
u2 = kpφeφ + kdφ ˙eφ + kiφ
t

0
eφ(τ)dτ
u3 = kpθeθ + kdθ ˙eθ + kiθ
t

0
eθ(τ)dτ
u4 = kpψeψ + kdψ ˙eψ + kiψ
t

0
eψ(τ)dτ
(15)
where kpφ, kdφ, kiφ, kpθ, kdθ, kiθ, kpψ, kdψ, and kiψ are some
positive gains. Tracking error signals eφ(t), eθ(t), and eψ(t) in
(15) are deﬁned as
eφ = φd −φ
eθ = θd −θ
eψ = ψd −ψ
(16)
where φd(t) and θd(t) are obtained from the outer-loop via (14)
and (12), and ψd(t) denotes a desired time-varying trajectory
for the yaw channel.
D. System Identiﬁcation
Due to the light structure and small body size, the ﬂight
properties associated with the low Reynolds number will bring
strong uncertainties to the nano quadrotor’s dynamic model. It
is very difﬁcult to obtain accurate values for the dynamic sys-
tem parameters in (5). For the consideration of the experimental
implementation, a linear attitude dynamic model of the nano
quadrotor helicopter is obtained via the system identiﬁcation
method which is based on the least square parameter estimation
algorithm in [27].
It is reasonable to assume that the dynamics for the roll
channel, pitch channel, and the yaw channel are some single-
input-and-single-output systems (SISO) [28]. Also, due to the
symmetric properties of the quadrotor’s structure, the roll chan-
nel and the pitch channel have nearly the same dynamics, i.e.,
the same dynamic model can be used to denote the dynamics
for these two channels.
The data-collection experiments are performed by the human
pilot in PID controller based closed loop. To an inherently un-
stable system like the nano quadrotor, closed-loop experiment
is the best choice, since the designed PID controller is known,
the closed-loop identiﬁcation result can be transferred to open-
loop identiﬁcation result [27]. The human pilot controlled the
quadrotor helicopter’s motion in the roll, pitch, and yaw sepa-
rately, and the ﬂight data is recorded by the ground station for
analyzing the dynamics. The quadrotor’s attitude response is
recorded at a frequency of 50 Hz.
Using normalized inputs from pilot as model input, and
actual attitude angles as model output, the Black-box transfer
function models are chosen to represent the SISO roll chan-
nel, pitch channel, and yaw channel dynamics. By employing
the least square parameter estimation algorithm, the identiﬁed
transfer function for the pitch and roll dynamics are obtained as
follows:
Gφ(s) = Gθ(s) =
3.205s2 + 899.8s + 12710
s3 + 18.51s2 + 697.4s + 4072
(17)
and the identiﬁed transfer function for the yaw dynamics is
obtained as follows:
Gψ(s)=
−219.8s3+1.0×105s2−5.46∗106s+7.16×108
s4+262.9s3+4.77×104s2+2.62×106s+1.42×104.
(18)
To verify the accuracy of the system identiﬁcation results,
the responses of the identiﬁed models in (17) and (18) are
compared with the real-time measured helicopter attitude re-
sponse by using other sets of actual ﬂight test data, which
are different from the ones that have been employed in the
identiﬁcation process. The identiﬁcation error for the pitch
channel is illustrated in Fig. 4, and the identiﬁcation error for
the yaw channel is shown in Fig. 5. From Fig. 4, it can be seen
that there are good matching between the simulated attitude
response and the actual ﬂight data. Thus, the ﬁdelity of the
identiﬁed models is guaranteed.
The attitude dynamic model obtained in (17) and (18) is used
for the simulation of the attitude control algorithms developed
in (15) to determine the proper values for the control gains kpφ,
kdφ, kiφ, kpθ, kdθ, kiθ, kpψ, kdψ, and kiψ, these gain values are
then employed in the subsequent real-time ﬂight experiments.
III. MOTION ESTIMATION
For the control design in the previous section, it is essential
to obtain the position feedback P(t) and translational velocity
feedback ˙P(t) for the position control of the nano helicopter
However, due to the very strict payload ability limitation, it is
very difﬁcult for the nano quadrotor helicopter to be equipped
with a laser range ﬁnder as the position sensor just as the other
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.6]
ZHANG et al.: FLIGHT CONTROL OF A NANO QUADROTOR HELICOPTER IN A GPS-DENIED ENVIRONMENT
6397
Fig. 4. Model validation of the pitch channel. Actual output and model
output (top), zoom in plot (middle), and identiﬁcation error (bottom).
Fig. 5. Model validation of the yaw channel. Actual output and model
output (top), zoom in plot (middle), identiﬁcation error (bottom).
bigger quadrotor UAVs did. Moreover, when the helicopter is
employed in the GPS denied environment, such as an indoor
environment, GPS signals cannot be utilized to provide any
position measurement. Ground motion capture systems, such as
the VICON system, can provide accurate motion information
for UAVs, but have very limited operation area, and need
quite a lot of efforts for the initial calibration. In this section,
we present a motion estimation algorithm that is suitable for
the nano quadrotor helicopter based on the vision information
obtained via the onboard monocular camera. To improve the
estimation accuracy, a Kalman ﬁlter which is running on the
autopilot board is utilized to fuse raw vision data with inertial
sensor data, and the delays related with data measurement are
also compensated via a time-stamp approach.
A. Vision-Based Localization Algorithm
In our previous research efforts, we have tested the motion
estimation algorithm based on the pyramidal KLT optical ﬂow
technique as described in [17]. This optical ﬂow based approach
works to a certain extent. Especially in environment with high
Fig. 6. Schematic of the modiﬁed PTAM algorithm.
blurry or repetitive surface features, the optical ﬂow approach
is proved to be with high robustness. However, in most cases,
tracking landmarks cannot be maintained for a long time, and
then the optical ﬂow tracker could not provide drift-free posi-
tion estimation, thus long duration on-spot hovering was very
difﬁcult to achieve with only optical ﬂow based methodology.
To eliminate drift in the ﬂight control, the visual frame-
work based on Parallel Tracking and Mapping (PTAM) [30]
is employed in this paper, this approach is highly capable
of tracking and mapping from a single camera, and its long-
term performance has been proved in [12]. Being divided into
tracking and mapping threads, the PTAM algorithm can obtain
real-time performances and 3-D maps of the environment. The
tracking thread estimates the pose of the nano helicopter based
on tracking and registering features, the parallel mapping thread
ﬁnds 3-D points of the world, builds and maintains the map.
Both tracking and mapping threads require an existing map to
operate on, so an initialization procedure is required to generate
an initial map. These three components of PTAM algorithm is
illustrated in Fig. 6.
The mainly drawback of the PTAM algorithm lies in the
ineffectiveness when it works in a self-similar scenario, it can
be easily confused by repetitive stripes or patterns. Although
this drawback can be compensated to some extent by using
wide-angle lens, the PTAM algorithm still might be lost in
tracking due to the fact that ground tiles often ﬁll all the ﬁeld of
view in the case that the UAV is ﬂying in low altitude.
The VSLAM framework in Robot Operating System pro-
vided by ETH [29] is chosen as our starting point, and several
major modiﬁcations are made to the VSLAM software for the
ﬂight control of our nano quadrotor helicopter. These modiﬁca-
tions are listed as follows.
(1) The VSLAM framework alone cannot provide the mag-
nitude or absolute scale of translational motion. In the
original software, manually initialization is needed [30],
and this initialization step is kind of tricky and inac-
curate. In order to transfer proper position information
to the ﬁlter for data fusion, we use the data from
the onboard barometer sensor to trim the initial scale
estimation according to the absolute measurement of
the helicopter’s altitude. This revision brings automatic
initialization for the VSLAM procedure.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.7]
6398
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
(2) In most cases, the ﬂoor of indoor environment cannot
provide sufﬁcient variation in features, which leads to
map lost for the VSLAM framework or noisy mea-
surement, thus the ﬂight control performance will be
deteriorated. To deal with this issue, with the adequate
computational power on the ground, we revise the code
of the VSLAM procedure to extract as many as possible
detectable features in the procedure of new key frames
generating. This modiﬁcation has led to a much more
robust control performance for indoor environments.
(3) We have merged the optical ﬂow algorithm with the orig-
inal PTAM code, as depicted in Fig. 6. When the
quadrotor is ﬂying above a self-similar scenario, and the
tracking quality deteriorates and reaches a pre-deﬁned
threshold, the optical ﬂow algorithm can override the
pose estimation to maintain accurate translational veloc-
ity estimation. In the original code, sudden map losing of
the PTAM algorithm often leads to a catastrophic crash
of the UAV. By merging these two algorithms together,
long-term drift-free localization and short-term robust
velocity estimation can be achieved simultaneously.
B. Data Fusion and Delay Compensation by
Kalman Filter
Wireless transmission of the video data will bring quite a lot
of perturbation to the images, such as random image blurring
or image discontinuity, which leads to tracking loss of the
key frames. Moreover, there are non-negligible delays in the
control loop, and the main sources for the delay are wireless
video capture delay and VSLAM algorithm computation delay.
To address these issues, a Kalman ﬁlter is employed to fuse
all available onboard data to obtain a delay-compensated and
smooth pose estimation for the ﬂight controller. Let the state
vector X ∈R6 is deﬁned as
X = (x, y, z, ˙x, ˙y, ˙z)T
(19)
where (x, y, z) denotes the translational position of the quadro-
tor, and ( ˙x, ˙y, ˙z) denotes the translational velocity of the
quadrotor, both of them are expressed in the inertial frame.
The state transition equation and the observation equation of
the Kalman ﬁlter are provided, respectively as follows:
X(k + 1) = AX(k) + B (δ(k) + ω(k))
(20)
Y (k) = CX(k) + ν(k)
(21)
where δ and Y are the input and measurement vectors, respec-
tively, the random variables ω and v represent the process and
measurement noise, respectively, which are assumed to be inde-
pendent to each other and with normal probability distributions.
Input vector δ and measurement vector Y are deﬁned as
δ = (ax, ay, az)T
Y = (x, y, z)T
(22)
where (ax, ay, az) denotes the translational acceleration which
are obtained from the onboard IMU. The matrices A and B are
set as follows:
A=
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
1
0
0
δt
0
0
0
1
0
0
δt
0
0
0
1
0
0
δt
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
B=
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
1
2δ2
t
0
0
0
1
2δ2
t
0
0
0
1
2δ2
t
δt
0
0
0
δt
0
0
0
δt
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(23)
where δt represents the sampling time of the sensor data. The
matrix C is set as follows:
C =
⎡
⎣
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
⎤
⎦.
(24)
The objective of the Kalman ﬁlter is to estimate ˆX(k|k) at
time k by using the measurement Y (k), the previous estimation
ˆX(k|k −1), and the input δ(k −1). The statistically optimal
estimator is given as follows:
ˆX(k|k −1) = A ˆ
X(k −1) + Bδ(k −1)
P(k|k −1) = AP(k −1)AT + BQBT
H(k) = P(k|k −1)CT 
CP(k|k −1)CT + D
−1
ˆX(k) = ˆX(k|k −1) + H(k)

Y (k) −C ˆX(k|k −1)

P(k) = (I −H(k)C) P(k|k −1)
(25)
where Q represents the noise in acceleration readings and D
represents the noise from vision measurements, both matrices
are diagonal and can be determined by the logging ﬂight data.
We have found that the IMU and barometer data are trans-
ferred with a relatively low delay, which can be ignored in
practical application. The largest delay comes from the wireless
video capture process, which is measured by recording a test
video under a 120 Hz frame rate. In the delay test, we light
a LED in front of the wireless camera, after a certain delay
it’ll light in the screen of our ground station, by counting the
interval frames from the recorded video, this capture and image
processing delay is determined. In our tests, this delay Δtvslam
is around 210 ms, while the new control command needs around
20 ms, which is denoted by Δtcommand, to be transferred to
the quadrotor’s actuators. To predict quadrotor’s pose at the
time of t + Δtcommand, all incoming data are time-stamped
and stored in an observation buffer which can hold incoming
data and estimated states for up to 600 ms. When the pose
estimation from the VSLAM framework arrived with known
delay, the data at the corresponding time is chosen from the pre-
set observation buffer, and then the prediction is started from
the last available observation from the VSLAM framework,
and the new prediction is generated ahead up to t + Δtcommand
using the stored sensor measurements. By recalculating the last
cycles of the Kalman ﬁlter, delay compensated measurements
can be obtained for real-time control.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.8]
ZHANG et al.: FLIGHT CONTROL OF A NANO QUADROTOR HELICOPTER IN A GPS-DENIED ENVIRONMENT
6399
Fig. 7. Ceiling view of the indoor environment.
Fig. 8. Position errors of the indoor hovering test.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, ﬂight test results in different scenarios are
provided to show the nano quadrotor’s control performance,
along with some images during the ﬂight. The results including
hovering control and trajectory tracking control in an indoor
environment, and hovering control in an outdoor environment
under wind disturbance. For the comparison purpose, an addi-
tional outdoor hovering ﬂight test is performed in which a tra-
ditional PID algorithm is employed as the outer-loop controller.
All the experiments are implemented without any help from
GPS or ground motion capture system. For the consideration
of the performance evaluation, a ceiling camera system is used
to provide ground truth for indoor experiments, which is able to
provide position reference with a accuracy up to 0.005 m.
A. Indoor Hovering Control
Fig. 7 shows the ceiling view of the indoor ﬂight test en-
vironment. Default ceiling lights are the only lighting source
used in the experiment. Because the ﬂoor of the ﬂight arena is
covered with uniformly white tile, a structured cloth is placed
on the ground to provide a normal level of features which can
bring means of texture changing. The control objective is to
let the nano quadrotor helicopter hovering at the original point
Fig. 9. Horizontal coordinate plot of the indoor hovering test.
Fig. 10. Histograms of position errors of the indoor hovering test.
with the desired horizontal position being set as xd = 0 m and
yd = 0 m. The nano quadrotor is controlled to hold its height
at zd = 1.8 m thus the ground effects can be ignored. Here,
we demonstrate only part (about 90 seconds) of the whole
hovering ﬂight test result. Fig. 8 shows the nano quadrotor’s
position errors during the hovering test, and Fig. 9 shows the
horizontal coordinate plot. Fig. 10 shows the histogram of
the position errors for the x-direction and the y-direction. The
maximum position error during the indoor hovering ﬂight for
the x-direction, the y-direction, and the z-direction is about
±0.1 m. More than 85% of the all recorded horizontal points
stay in a circle with a radius of 0.075 m. The RMS value
of the position error is 0.0519 m in x-direction, 0.0428 m in
y-direction, and 0.039 m in z-direction. The variation of roll,
pitch and yaw angles are demonstrated in Fig. 11. The roll and
pitch angles are controlled within about ±1◦, and the yaw angle
is controlled within ±2◦.
B. Indoor Tracking Control
To testify the tracking performance of the proposed design,
an indoor tracking ﬂight test is implemented. The desired
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.9]
6400
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
Fig. 11. Variation of the attitude angles during the indoor hovering test.
Fig. 12. Horizontal coordinate plot of the indoor tracking test.
trajectory is set to be a rectangle with the size of 2.5 m ×
1.1 m. The nano quadrotor helicopter is still hold at the altitude
of 1.8 m during the experiment. The horizontal coordinate
plot is shown in Fig. 12 in which the dashed line represents
the reference trajectory and the solid line denotes the actual
ﬂight path of the helicopter. The test lasts about 100 sec-
onds, and the quadrotor has ﬁnished the trajectory tracking
for two times. Fig. 13 shows the position tracking errors,
Fig. 14 shows the histograms of the translational tracking
errors, and Fig. 15 shows variation of the attitude angles. The
maximum position tracking error is about ±0.25 m for the
x-direction and about ±0.5 m for thex y-direction. The altitude
control error for the z-direction is about ±0.05 m. The RMS
value of the position error is 0.1619 m in x-direction, 0.1428 m
in y-direction, and 0.0215 m in z-direction. Note that even
though the maximum position tracking error for y-direction is
about ±0.5 m, but it can be seen from Fig. 14 that about 85%
of ey(t) is less than ±0.2 m. This means the good tracking
performance for indoor environment has been achieved.
Fig. 13. Position errors of the indoor tracking test.
Fig. 14. Histograms of translational position errors of the indoor track-
ing test.
Fig. 15. Variation of the attitude angles during the indoor tracking test.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.10]
ZHANG et al.: FLIGHT CONTROL OF A NANO QUADROTOR HELICOPTER IN A GPS-DENIED ENVIRONMENT
6401
Fig. 16. Outdoor environment for the ﬂight test.
Fig. 17. Position errors of the outdoor hovering test using the RISE
controller.
C. Outdoor Hovering Control
To verify the nonlinear robust position controller proposed
in (12), some outdoor hovering experiments have been per-
formed. The testing environment is illustrated in Fig. 16. The
wind speed recorded during the ﬂight test is about 1.5 m/sec
according to the measurement of the anemometer. The control
objective is to let the nano quadrotor helicopter hovering at
the original point under the effect of wind disturbance. The
desired horizontal position is set as xd = 0 m and yd = 0 m,
and the nano quadrotor is controlled to hold its height at 0.9 m.
Fig. 17 shows the nano quadrotor’s position errors during the
hovering test, and Fig. 18 shows the horizontal coordinate plot.
The maximum position error during the indoor hovering ﬂight
for the x-direction and the y-direction is about ±0.2 m, the
altitude control error for the z-direction is about ±0.1 m. The
histograms of the translational position errors are shown in
Fig. 19. The RMS value of the position error is 0.1089 m in x-
direction, 0.1322 m in y-direction, and 0.0424 m in z-direction.
The variation of the attitude angles are demonstrated in Fig. 20.
The pitch and roll angles are controlled within ±5◦, and the yaw
angle is controlled within ±2◦.
Fig. 18. Horizontal coordinate plot of the outdoor hovering test using
the RISE controller.
Fig. 19. Histograms of translational errors of the outdoor hovering test
using the RISE controller.
Fig. 20. Variation of the attitude angles during the outdoor hovering test
using the RISE controller.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.11]
6402
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015
Fig. 21. Histograms of translational errors of the outdoor hovering test
using the PID controller.
D. Comparison With PID Controller
For the comparison purpose, a traditional PID controller
is employed for the outer-loop (position control), and some
outdoor hovering ﬂight tests are performed. The testing en-
vironment and control objective are the same as the ones in
the previous subsection for the hovering test with RISE based
nonlinear position controller. The histograms of the transla-
tional position errors are shown in Fig. 21. The RMS value
of the position error is 0.2824 m in x-direction, 0.2687 m in
y-direction, and 0.0436 m in z-direction.
From Figs. 18 and 19, it can be checked that more than 70%
of the all recorded horizontal points stay in a circle with a
radius of 0.2 m with the help of the proposed nonlinear position
controller. For Fig. 21, it can be checked that only about 10.83%
of all the recorded horizontal points stay in a circle with a
radius of 0.2 m in the ﬂight test with PID position controller.
Thus, the proposed RISE based nonlinear position controller
can achieve a much better control performance than the PID
position controller.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a nano quadrotor helicopter which has a mass
about only 45 grams was developed. Given the limited payload
ability, the tiny body size, and the vulnerability to external dis-
turbance, the control design for this kind of helicopter is a very
difﬁcult one. By using the modiﬁed visual SLAM algorithm
with the visual data from an onboard monocular camera, ac-
curate hovering and trajectory tracking control are achieved in
GPS-denied indoor and outdoor environments without the help
of an external ground motion capture system, such as a VICON
system. The PID control approach is combined with a nonlinear
robust feedback design to formulate the ﬂight controller for
the nano quadrotor helicopter. Experimental results in different
scenarios show that the proposed design has achieved good
hovering and trajectory tracking control performance. Future
work will be extended to autonomous ﬂight control in a more
conﬁned non-constructed environment.
Remark 1: The video clips of the ﬂight experiments
can be accessed via the following link: http://youtu.be/
AJTTABy7dEY.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Fregene, “Unmanned aerial vehicles and control: Lockheed Martin
advanced technology laboratories,” IEEE Control Syst. Mag., vol. 32,
no. 5, pp. 32–34, Oct. 2012.
[2] L. Petricca, P. Ohlckers, and C. Grinde, “Micro- and nano-air vehicles:
State of the art,” Int. J. Aerosp. Eng., vol. 2011, 2011, Art. ID. 214 549.
[3] M. Keennon, K. Klingebiel, H. Won, and A. Andriukov, “Development
of the nano hummingbird: A tailless ﬂapping wing micro air vehicle,”
presented at the AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meet., Nashville, TN, USA,
Jan. 2012, Paper AIAA 2012-0588.
[4] G. W. Cai, J. Dias, and L. Seneviratne, “A survey of small-scale un-
manned aerial vehicles: Recent advances and future development trend,”
Unmanned Syst., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1–25, 2014.
[5] Y. Fang, X. Liu, and X. Zhang, “Adaptive active visual servoing of non-
holonomic mobile robots,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 59, no. 1,
pp. 486–497, Jan. 2012.
[6] F. Lin, X. Dong, B. M. Chen, K. Y. Lum, and T. H. Lee, “A robust real-
time embedded vision system on an unmanned rotorcraft for ground target
following,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 1038–1049,
Feb. 2012.
[7] H. Romero, S. Salazar, and R. Lozano, “Visual servoing applied to
real-time stabilization of a multi-rotor UAV,” Robotica, vol. 30, no. 7,
pp. 1203–1212, Dec. 2012.
[8] H. Lim, H. Lee and H. J. Kim, “Onboard ﬂight control of a mi-
cro quadrotor using single strapdown optical ﬂow sensor,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Vilamoura, Portugal, Oct. 2012,
pp. 495–500.
[9] D. Eberli, D. Scaramuzza, S. Weiss, and R. Siegwart, “Vision based
position control for MAVs using one single circular landmark,” J. Intell.
Robot. Syst., vol. 61, no. 1–4, pp. 495–512, Jan. 2011.
[10] D. Honegger, L. Meier, P. Tanskanen, and M. Pollefeys, “An open source
and open hardware embedded metric optical ﬂow CMOS camera for
indoor and outdoor applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Karlsruhe, Germany, Mar. 2013, pp. 1736–1741.
[11] F. Fraundorfer et al., “Vision-based autonomous mapping and exploration
using a quadrotor MAV,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.,
Vilamoura, Portugal, Oct. 2012, pp. 4557–4564.
[12] S. Weiss et al., “Monocular vision for long-term micro aerial vehicle state
estimation: A compendium,” J. Field Robot., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 803–831,
Sep./Oct. 2013.
[13] N. Sun and Y. Fang, “New energy analytical results for the regula-
tion of underactuated overhead cranes: An end-effector motion-based
approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 4723–4734,
Dec. 2012.
[14] Y. Fang, P. Wang, N. Sun, and Y. Zhang, “Dynamics analysis and non-
linear control of an offshore boom crane,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron.,
vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 414–427, Jan. 2014.
[15] H. Liu, G. Lu, and Y. Zhong, “Robust LQR attitude control of a
3-DOF laboratory helicopter for aggressive maneuvers,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Electron., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 4627–4636, Oct. 2013.
[16] S. Chen, “Kalman ﬁlter for robot vision: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Electron., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 4409–4420, Nov. 2012.
[17] F. Kendoul, Y. Zhenyu, and K. Nonami. “Guidance and nonlinear control
system for autonomous ﬂight of minirotorcraft unmanned aerial vehicles,”
J. Field Robot., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 311–334, May/Jun. 2010.
[18] M. Quigley et al., “ROS: An open-source robot operating system,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. Workshop Open Source Softw.,
Munich, Germany, Jun. 2009, pp. 1–6.
[19] T. Hamel, R. Mahony, R. Lozano, and J. Otrowski, “Dynamic modelling
and conﬁguration stabilization for an X-4 ﬂyer,” in Proc. IFAC World
Congr., Barcelona, Spain, Jul. 2002, p. 846.
[20] T. Hamel, R. Mahony, and A. Chriette, “Visual servo trajectory tracking
for a four rotor VTOL aerial vehicle,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Washington, DC, USA, May 2002, pp. 2781–2786.
[21] T. Madani and A. Benallegue, “Backstepping control for a quadrotor
helicopter,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Beijing,
China, Oct. 2006, pp. 3255–3260.
[22] V. Chitrakaran, D. M. Dawson, J. Chen, and M. Feemster, “Vision assisted
autonomous landing of an unmanned aerial vehicle,” in Proc. 44th IEEE
Conf. Decision Control, Seville, Spain, Dec. 2005, pp. 1465–1470.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[p.12]
ZHANG et al.: FLIGHT CONTROL OF A NANO QUADROTOR HELICOPTER IN A GPS-DENIED ENVIRONMENT
6403
[23] D. B. Lee, T. C. Burg, B. Xian, and D. M. Dawson, “Output feedback
tracking control of an underactuated quad-rotor UAV,” in Proc. Amer.
Control Conf., New York, NY, USA, Jul. 2007, pp. 1775–1780.
[24] B. Xian, D. M. Dawson, M. S. de Queiroz, and J. Chen, “A continuous
asymptotic tracking control strategy for uncertain nonlinear systems,”
IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1206–1211, Jul. 2004.
[25] Y. Zhang, B. Xian, Q. Yin, Y. Liu, and F. Wang, “Autonomous control
system for the quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle,” in Proc. 31st Chin.
Control Conf., Hefei, China, Jul. 2012, pp. 4862–4867.
[26] P. M. Patre, W. Mackunis, C. Makkar, and W. E. Dixon, “Asymptotic
tracking for systems with structured and unstructured uncertainties,” IEEE
Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 373–379, Mar. 2008.
[27] G. Cai, B. M. Chen, K. Peng, M. Dong, and T. H. Lee, “Modeling
and control of the yaw channel of a UAV helicopter,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Electron., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 3426–3434, Sep. 2008.
[28] D. Mellinger, M. Shomin, and V. Kumar, “Control of quadrotors for robust
perching and landing,” in Proc. Int. Powered Lift Conf., Philadelphia, PA,
USA, Oct. 2010, pp. 1–8.
[29] M. Achtelik
et al., “SFly:
Swarm of micro ﬂying robots,” in
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Vilamoura, Portugal,
Oct. 2012, pp. 2649–2650.
[30] S. Weiss, D. Scaramuzza, and R. Siegwart, “Monocular-SLAM-based
navigation for autonomous micro helicopters in GPS-denied environ-
ments,” J. Field Robot., vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 854–874, Nov. 2011.
Xu Zhang received the B.S degree in electri-
cal engineering from Tianjin University, Tianjin,
China, in 2006 and the M.S. degree in mechan-
ical engineering from Beijing Institute of Tech-
nology, Beijing, China, in 2009. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in the School
of Electrical Engineering, Tianjin University.
His main research interests include naviga-
tion and control of micro unmanned helicopters
and sensor fusing.
Bin
Xian
(S’00–M’04–SM’09)
received
the
B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1996,
the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from
the Institute of Electrical Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Science, Beijing, China, in 2000,
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
from Clemson University, Clemson, SC, USA, in
2004.
From 2004 to 2005, he was a Postdoctoral
Fellow with the Department of Mechanical En-
gineering and Materials Science, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
He is currently a Professor with the School of Electrical Engineering
and Automation, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. His main research
interests include nonlinear control of mechatronic systems, autonomous
aerial vehicle systems, and robotics.
Bo Zhao received the B.E. degree in automa-
tion from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in
2010. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree in the School of Electrical Engineering
and Automation, Tianjin University.
His main research interests include un-
manned aerial vehicle systems and nonlinear
control of robotic systems.
Yao Zhang received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in automation from Tianjin University, Tianjin,
China, in 2009. He is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree in the School of Electrical
Engineering and Automation, Tianjin University.
His main research interests include nonlinear
control, intelligent control, and robotics.
Authorized licensed use limited to: KIIT University. Downloaded on September 16,2026 at 19:00:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== END ===
