warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
=== pdf_text.py v1.0 ===
file: E:\GPS_Denied_SLR\05_papers_fulltext\REC_1307.pdf
sha256: 42C12FCAB18A48C9B9800B907A234B9953733C64BDC3474F485B7DB21DACE710
library: pymupdf (fitz) v1.28.2
pages: 38
=== BEGIN ===
[p.1]
An Architecture for Robust UAV Navigation
in GPS-denied Areas
Francisco J. Perez-Grau
CATEC
Center for Advanced Aerospace Technologies
fjperez@catec.aero
Ricardo Ragel
Dpt. of System Engineering and Automation
University of Seville
delatorre@us.es
Fernando Caballero
Dpt. of System Engineering and Automation
University of Seville
fcaballero@us.es
Antidio Viguria
CATEC
Center for Advanced Aerospace Technologies
aviguria@catec.aero
Anibal Ollero
Dpt. of System Engineering and Automation
University of Seville
aollero@us.es
Abstract
This article presents a software architecture for safe and reliable autonomous navigation
of aerial robots in GPS-denied areas. The techniques employed within key modules from
this architecture are explained in detail, such as a 6D localization approach based on visual
odometry and Monte Carlo Localization, or a variant of the Lazy Theta* algorithm for
motion planning. The aerial robot used to demonstrate this approach has been extensively
tested over the past two years for localization and state estimation without any external
positioning systems, autonomous local obstacle avoidance and local path planning among
other tasks. This article describes the architecture and main algorithms used to achieve
these goals in order to build a robust autonomous system.
1
Introduction
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have been the target for extensive research activities in the past several
years. Their use in civil and commercial applications is continuously growing as they are becoming more
popular, even essential in some cases such as emergency services. Outdoor obstacle-free operation based
on GPS can be generally assumed for UAVs since diﬀerent available commercial products already oﬀer a
mature performance, such as the mass-produced models from DJI1. However, some applications require the
aerial vehicles to ﬂy in conﬁned environments where GPS might be unreliable or even unavailable. Relying
exclusively on GPS for positioning might also pose safety issues in terms of signal jamming or platform
hijacking, resulting in a potentially vulnerable system. The introduction of aerial robots collaborating with
humans in diﬀerent applications is also a strong motivation for procuring reliable autonomous systems that
can operate safely in their functioning. Hence, there is still a need for reliability in several key enabling
technologies to achieve a safe and robust autonomous system, such as localization, navigation and planning.
1http://www.dji.com/products/drones
[p.2]
Sensors 
Interface 
6DoF  
Pose 
References 
Desired Waypoint 
RC  
Commands 
Sensor  
Data 
Robot 
Localization 
Trajectory 
Planner 
Controller 
Actuators 
Interface 
Trajectory 
Tracker 
Sensor-based 
Odometry 
Tele-operation 
UAV 
Figure 1: Schematic overview of the proposed architecture.
In order to simplify the accomplishment of all the tasks related to the autonomous navigation of an aerial
robot, a framework for combining and executing heterogeneous software modules has been developed. There
are several open-source projects that target complete software architectures (Lim et al., 2012), such as
ArduPilot 2 or PX43. However these approaches usually lack ﬂexibility to perform and support high-level
functionalities, which are often demanded by users that wish to develop innovative approaches towards UAV
autonomous navigation. In recent years, several initiatives have arisen from some research groups. The
Autonomous Systems Lab from ETH Zurich developed asctec mav framework 4, however it is dependent on
the UAV manufacturer such as shown in some of the lab members’ work (Oleynikova et al., 2015; Burri et al.,
2015). The Paparazzi project5 from ENAC is a complete solution that also includes speciﬁc hardware, the
Paparazzi autopilot. Another example is hector quadrotor 6 from TU Darmstadt, which is heavily focused
on simulation environments and has limited applicability in real systems performing experimental ﬂights.
Other works propose architectures for autonomous operations (Schmid et al., 2013; Michael et al., 2012;
Heng et al., 2014), but there is no evidence of versatility regarding the application of the same approach
in diﬀerent platforms or using diﬀerent sensors, since there are some architecture modules highly hardware-
dependent. Even though these approaches have produced major advances in this line of research, there are
still important challenges related to the achieved level of autonomy and ﬂexibility of the system to be able
to adapt it for diﬀerent aerial robots or applications.
Figure 1 shows our software architecture. The system is decomposed into several modules which are in
charge of diﬀerent tasks. The core idea is the combination of simple concepts and components to build a
reliable system. Each module runs as an independent process on-board the UAV. The diﬀerent modules can
implement a wide variety of algorithms and techniques for performing their task, according to the equipment
of the aerial robot. It is important to point out that working with UAVs involves additional constraints
in terms of computation and payload capacity which must be taken into account for the development of
applicable systems.
That said, the diﬀerent algorithms can be developed independently and switch or
replace them within any of the modules to solve the task that is intended to perform. This does not aﬀect
the rest of the architecture provided that the new algorithm complies with the applicable input and output
interfaces of the speciﬁc module.
2http://ardupilot.org/
3http://px4.io
4http://wiki.ros.org/asctec mav framework
5http://wiki.paparazziuav.org/wiki/Main Page
6http://wiki.ros.org/hector quadrotor
[p.3]
Besides, the architecture is focused on the software components, remaining independent from the hardware
used underneath. The core algorithms of the system do not depend on the speciﬁc manufacturer of the UAV
platform or the speciﬁc sensors that are used, and hence it is possible to replace them with a diﬀerent model
or even with an upgraded version of the device, implying only minor changes to the system. Apart from that,
it is possible to complement the system with additional sensors or enhanced processing capabilities without
altering the overall scheme. Moreover, this architecture is able to accommodate applications involving a
single or multiple UAVs, as well as highly autonomous operations or tele-operated missions.
One of the ﬁrst things to consider for an autonomous robot is the estimation of the current state (position
and orientation) of the platform in a speciﬁc coordinate system. For this, sensor data is ﬁrst processed and
used to obtain a localization estimation with respect to its environment. This is commonly carried out by
an odometry calculation in Sensor-based Odometry and a localization estimation in Robot Localization to
produce a reliable 6 Degree-of-Freedom pose (position and orientation). Sensor data is commonly used in
both modules in order to reduce uncertainties and improve the robustness of the estimations, especially for
long-term operation of the aerial robot.
It is very common to ﬁnd approaches that fuse inertial sensors and altitude sensors (like barometers, ultra-
sonic sensors or lasers) with monocular vision in order to estimate the robot localization based on visual
Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM) (Davison et al., 2007)(Pinies et al., 2007), (Achtelik et al.,
2012)(Weiss et al., 2011). These approaches work very well when we repeatedly visit the same area, but
usually fail at high-speed UAV motions in unknown scenarios, although some recent works provide good per-
formances under fast motions (Bloesch et al., 2015). Optical ﬂow approaches (Honegger et al., 2013)(Mebarki
et al., 2016) make use of the same sensors but aim to estimate only linear velocities. These approaches have
demonstrated to work very well for up and down facing cameras in UAVs when the viewed scene is approx-
imately planar. This is a good solution when either the ground or the ceiling is planar and it has enough
texture, however velocity integration for localization (odometry) quickly diverges and these methods cannot
be used for long-term localization.
Typically at the cost of higher computational requirements, stereovision systems provide direct depth mea-
surements in a general 3D environment for a given camera baseline. SLAM (Kneip et al., 2011) and pure
odometry approaches (Geiger et al., 2011) demonstrate good results at short-term localization and even
in long trajectories without loop closing (Oleynikova et al., 2015). Many of the algorithms developed for
stereovision odometry and SLAM can be applied to 3D cameras based on pattern projection (Endres et al.,
2012)(Kerl et al., 2013), also using the recently available Google Tango (Winterhalter et al., 2015).
The approach followed by this research work splits the robot positioning problem into odometry and lo-
calization. Some modules of the software architecture like the local planner or the controller will need a
smooth and stable robot motion estimation; they do not care about the global positioning actually, instead
they just need to know accurately how much the robot moved in the last seconds. Other modules like the
global planner need accurate robot positioning into a map in order to plan the proper actions. We can
ﬁnd approaches in the state of the art that compute both estimations (odometry and localization) at the
same time such as RGBD-SLAM (Endres et al., 2012), ORB-SLAM (Mur-Artal et al., 2015), CCNY RGB-D
(Dryanovski et al., 2013), RTAB-Map (Labbe and Michaud, 2014) or iSAM (Kaess et al., 2008). However
these approaches build their maps online and do not exploit the fact that the robot moves in a partially
known environment; they are very useful for building such map oﬀ-line however.
Once we have a reliable robot localization, the next step will consider tackling more complex tasks, such
as where to go or how to reach a speciﬁc location. The generation of safe trajectories is another essential
capability for autonomous navigation, especially in cluttered areas where several obstacles or even other
robots can be found. Other scenarios might involve health and safety regulations that must be followed
in order to collaborate with human workers, such as in manufacturing plants. These environments exhibit
ﬁxed or mobile elements and simple or complex obstacles, all of them sharing the same area. Therefore, the
aerial robot must continuously conduct a local recalculation of the trajectory in real-time in order to avoid
collisions with diﬀerent types of elements as the on-board sensors gain information about its surrounding.
[p.4]
(a) RRT
(b) Lazy Theta*-W
(c) Statistical results
Figure 2: Path planning results of RRT algorithm and our modiﬁed Lazy Theta* in a simulated 50x50x5m
maze, executed on a 2.0 GHz Intel i7 CPU. It can be seen how the trajectory computed by RRT greatly
varies from one execution to another (represented through diﬀerent colors), while the result of our modiﬁed
Lazy Theta* is always the same.
Additionally, the UAV might also need to adopt diﬀerent collision avoidance strategies depending on the
nature of the obstacles; the robot should avoid persons diﬀerently than static objects for instance. Sensor
data is also acquired by the Trajectory Planner for reactive collision avoidance, along with the localization
output in order to compute safe trajectories in the aerial robot environment.
Planning UAV trajectories in a full 3D environments is a complex and time consuming task. Many diﬀerent
approaches have been proposed in the state of the art for online and oﬄine UAV trajectory planning.
However, if we consider the resource limitations (in terms of time and computation) of the aerial robot,
two are the main methods used: probabilistic or sampling-based approaches and heuristic or graph-based
methods.
Sampling-based algorithms, like Rapidly-Exploring Random Trees (RRT) (LaValle, 1998; LaValle and
Kuﬀner Jr, 2000) and Probabilistic Rad Maps (PRM) (Bohlin and Kavraki, 2000), are speciﬁcally designed
to handle non-holonomic constraints (e.g. wheeled robots), high degrees of freedom and large spaces that
require to be rapidly and uniformly explored, for example a big manufacturing plant. Several variants of the
RRT-based method have been proposed. RRT* (Karaman and Frazzoli, 2011) produces very optimal paths
at the expense of non real-time rates. On the other hand, RRT-Connect (Kuﬀner and LaValle, 2000) resolves
the timing problem, achieving faster solutions, but at the cost of obtaining longer paths. In (Oleynikova
et al., 2016), diﬀerent probabilistic methods are used to solve the motion planning problem in UAVs. It
proposes to use a continuous-time trajectory optimization algorithm to perform the local replanning. Their
experimental results show that the replanning only took few milliseconds, meanwhile RRT* took some sec-
onds. However, both algorithms presents a signiﬁcant inconvenience to be used as real-time algorithm in
replanning tasks on UAVs: given an initial and target positions, the planned trajectory can vary signiﬁ-
cantly from one execution to another, so several consecutive replannings could result in unnecessary longer
and inconsistent replanned trajectories. This can be easily seen in Figures 2a and 2c, where the trajectories
have been computed using the RRT implementation in MoveIt! (Sucan and Chitta, 2013).
On the other hand, heuristic algorithms like A* (Hart et al., 1968), Theta* (Nash et al., 2007) and D*
(Carsten et al., 2006), are specially designed to obtain the shortest path, exploring directly from the initial
state to the target state, restricting the explored areas and getting a run time that is highly conﬁgurable and
dependent on the number of variables and their resolution. The usual drawback imposed by discrete search
techniques is that paths are formed by grid edges, so they are often not the shortest path in the continuous
space. However, this issue was solved by the any-angle path planning Theta* and its Lazy Theta* variation
(Nash et al., 2010), which also optimizes the computational load of the algorithm. An additional advantage
of graph-based algorithms is the possibility of reusing previous computation for replanning easier than
sampling-based algorithms due to the computational advantages that graphs presents with respect to trees
(Pivtoraiko et al., 2013). As shown in Figures 2b and 2c, given an initial and target positions, the planning
[p.5]
result of our variation of Lazy Theta* is close to the shortest path, it is always the same solution and it
gets always shorter paths and computation time than the RRT algorithm. This high repeatability of the
results makes heuristic algorithms especially suitable for use as trajectory replanning methods, where several
consecutive and connected paths are computed.
Thus, given the holonomic aerial robot motion characteristics, the limitations in terms of computation and
the reduced planning space (just 3D positions), this paper opts for graph-based algorithms for planning
trajectories, as it will be explained in the corresponding section.
The Trajectory Tracker ensures the UAV reaches the desired waypoints, calculating the reference positions,
speeds and times when they have to be commanded and thus sends the Controller the references that it
needs to calculate the necessary actions for the UAV. Special focus has been given to safety in the operation
of the aerial robot, hence the key components in our approach are the perception of the environment for
both localization and motion planning. This will allow the UAV to select an appropriate behavior according
to the awareness of the current situation.
The state estimation (output of Robot Localization) and the
commanded references (output of Trajectory Tracker) are sent to the Controller. The robot state includes
position, velocity and attitude.
The context in which the authors have developed and tested the proposed architecture is related to the
demonstration of high-level semi-autonomous operation of a UAV for an inspection task. The motivation of
this work is to enable unskilled workers to perform complex inspection missions with the aid of UAVs. This
has never been possible before as the complexity of UAV requires expert piloting skills. In this context, we
have developed a framework to perform localization and state estimation of the UAV without any external
positioning systems (e.g. GPS or motion capturing systems), perform autonomous local obstacle avoidance,
local path planning, following of structures or homing of the aerial robot.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the visual odometry system we have used in the
experiments. Section 3 details the robot localization approach valid for GPS-denied areas. The diﬀerent
motion planning strategies we have integrated are described in Section 4. The ﬁeld experiments are presented
in Section 5, along with data from ﬂight demonstration tests, followed by lessons learned and conclusions of
this work.
2
Visual Odometry
This section focuses on a primary estimation of robot poses based on data obtained from an RGB-D camera,
which provides images and 3D point clouds from its environment as shown in Figure 3. Our approach follows
the key ideas proposed in other approaches like rtSLAM (Roussillon et al., 2011), LIBVISO (Kitt et al., 2010)
or LIBFOVIS (Huang et al., 2011) but with special focus in computational resources and robustness. Our
odometry system combines images, point clouds, pose estimation and key-framing in a loose-coupling ﬁlter
in order to estimate a reliable and accurate localization at short term.
The approach in this work is based on a pipeline that takes advantage of all the information that the RGB-D
sensor provides, both visual and depth data. The algorithm is similar to the previous author work detailed
in (Perez-Grau et al., 2016), which is publicly available7. However, the previous work was based on a stereo
camera, and hence the pipeline has been adapted to meet the particularities of RGB-D data. Besides, some
improvements have been included, such as a ﬁne tuning for the key-framing approach, the introduction of the
IMU data as initialization for solving pose increments, and the computation of a sparse bundle adjustment
for pose reﬁning.
Our approach starts with a set of visual features extracted from the RGB images. At each frame, a set of
interest points, or key-points, is found from the RGB image. These key-points are visual features extracted
7http://wiki.ros.org/viodom
[p.6]
Figure 3: The RGB-D sensor used in this work, an Orbbec Astra, along with sample RGB (left) and depth
(right) images of the current scene in front of the UAV.
using the FAST algorithm (Features from Accelerated Segment Test) (Rosten and Drummond, 2006), which
is a method for corner detection with a strong computational eﬃciency. The identiﬁed features contain local
information that ideally make them repeatable across consecutive frames.
Depending on the environment, the scene in front of the UAV could be feature-less, or there might be strong-
detailed regions where all the key-points are detected. Both cases pose problems in the subsequent stages
due to poor transformation estimations. In order to overcome these issues, an image bucketing has been
adopted. The image is divided into several regions (six buckets in our approach), and a minimum number
of features is required to be extracted from each one, providing an even distribution of selected features.
The associated depth of each feature is obtained directly from the RGB-D sensor, thus enhancing the
set of FAST features (2D key-points) with depth information (3D key-points). Next step involves ﬁnding
correspondences between the sets of surviving key-points from the current and the previous frames. In order
to do that, the key-points need to be described in such way that some kind of comparison can be made
among them, and for that the ORB descriptor (Oriented FAST and Rotated BRIEF) (Rublee et al., 2011)
is used. Our work in (Perez-Grau et al., 2016) used the BRIEF descriptor, but ORB exhibits two important
beneﬁts: it is rotation invariant, and selects optimal sampling pairs of pixels around the key-point (BRIEF
uses random sampling pairs).
In order to match the 3D key-point descriptors, a robust matcher has been developed. This matcher only
considers correspondences that are symmetrical, i.e. are found from the current frame to the previous frame
and viceversa. Perspective constraints based on Fundamental Matrix are also imposed to remove outliers.
Once enough robust key-points have been found, the set of matches is used to solve a Perspective-n-Point
problem (PnP) (Lepetit et al., 2008). Given N 3D points in coordinate frame A, and their 2D projections
in a calibrated camera (with known matrix of intrinsic parameters K), the PnP problem is to estimate the
camera pose (rotation R and translation T) relative to A. The 3D points correspond to the previous frame,
and the 2D points are their projections in the current frame. Hence the resulting pose constitutes the motion
of the camera in the interval of time between both frames.
Odometry suﬀers from cumulative errors, therefore a key-framing approach has been adopted to partially
[p.7]
mitigate such eﬀect. New key-frames are produced when the feature tracking ﬂow exceeds a given threshold.
The key-frame stores information about its image descriptors, their 3D positions and the aerial robot pose
at that moment. Then, the frame matching occurs comparing the current frame against the last created key-
frame, instead of the immediately preceding frame, in such way that cumulative errors are present exclusively
within the production of new key-frames.
The odometry system reads data from the on-board IMU which is placed in the UAV autopilot, and integrates
the roll and pitch angles with the purely visual estimation in a loose-coupling manner. Another feature that
was developed in order to improve the robustness of the odometry estimation is a reﬁnement of the poses
using Sparse Bundle Adjustment (SBA) (Lourakis and Argyros, 2009). Considering the heavy computational
weight of a full bundle adjustment problem, which implies the reconstruction of the 3D structure and motion,
our approach only focuses on the camera poses (motion), leaving the structure as is by taking advantage
of the quality of the 3D point clouds that the RGB-D sensor provides.
We have implemented a light-
weight approach that only considers the reﬁnement of the 6D poses (position and orientation) for the last
N key-frames, speeding-up the algorithm and allowing on-line computation. The ﬁnal pose estimation is
transformed from the RGB-D frame to the aerial robot body frame and then is ready to be used by subsequent
modules in our framework.
The aforementioned approach is the one we have used in the ﬁeld experiments for demonstrating how our
framework works. Nevertheless, any other odometry approach based on visual information or any other sensor
data (e.g. LIDAR or radio-based ranging) can be used and adapted to meet the interfacing requirements of
our architecture, which is based on standard ROS data types.
3
Robot Localization
This section focuses on the robot localization in GPS-denied areas, relying only on information gathered by
on-board sensors. As it was previously mentioned, visual odometry can deliver good pose estimations in the
short term, but it will accumulate errors over time depending on the environment. Reliable long-term local-
ization is a challenging problem that cannot be robustly solved using pure visual odometry approaches. Our
architecture is mainly focused on the combination of visual odometry with additional sources of information
in order to keep the localization errors bounded.
Our framework allows the integration of any custom solution for aerial robot localization, even if it simply
relies on the pose estimation provided by the visual odometry module. The only requirement is to keep the
data types for the interfaces with the rest of modules, especially the motion planning stack. The experiments
described in this paper are based on the combination of visual odometry with an extension of a Monte Carlo
Localization (MCL) (Thrun et al., 2001) for 6D localization using 3D data from the RGB-D sensor. This
section details the development of such solution.
The use of an RGB-D sensor is a great advantage due to the fact that it is less reliant on the scene texture,
unlike stereo cameras, and lighting conditions while operating indoors. These factors make RGB-D sensors
more suitable for reliable localization in our framework. In our work, this sensor has been used to build a map
of the environment where the UAV is going to operate. This is a common situation for many autonomous
robot applications where the missions take place in a partially known environments; this map is required
if the end-user wants to perform way-point navigation. The use of a previously built map usually helps
obtaining a reliable localization estimation thanks to the prior knowledge of the environment. This map
can be precisely computed oﬀ-line using cameras or range sensors (e.g. LIDAR), using existing techniques
(Endres et al., 2012)(Pomerleau et al., 2013).
Our approach makes use of Monte Carlo Localization (MCL), which is a popular technique for indoor
robotics. It is based on a known map of the area and a particle ﬁlter to estimate the pose of the aerial robot
within the map. We have implemented an enhanced version of the adaptive MCL algorithm that is available
[p.8]
Figure 4: Initialization of the particle cloud in a known position within the 3D map.
in the ROS wiki8, since this one is limited to ground robots moving in a 2D environment and equipped with
a 2D laser scanner. An extension for 6D localization was presented in (Hornung et al., 2010), which considers
a 3D environment but it is still based on 2D laser scanner meant for 2D motion of humanoid robots; hence
it is not suitable for aerial robots. Our algorithm integrates 3D point clouds in a 3D map in order to solve
the aerial robot localization. The short-term pose estimation is reliable thanks to the visual odometry input,
and the localization errors over time are bounded thanks to the matching of point clouds against the map.
The particle ﬁlter consists of N particles pi, each one with the following state vector:
pi = [x, y, z, ψ]T
(1)
where ψ refers to the yaw angle of the aerial robot. Roll and pitch angles are not included into the state
vector because they are delivered and observable from the UAV on-board IMU. This greatly reduces the
computational complexity of the algorithm, allowing for real-time on-board computation.
The particles can be initialized manually or automatically by setting an initial position together with a
covariance matrix to distribute the particles in the space, as Figure 4 depicts. In order to be able to perform
autonomous navigation of the UAV from take-oﬀ, the initial position and yaw angle are known. Otherwise
the ﬁlter would need to wait until the robot moves and the particles start moving to more likely pose
hypotheses. Even though the convergence from automatic initialization does not take long, it is not adopted
in our experiments for practical reasons.
The particles are propagated following a robot motion model based on a fast and reliable visual odometry
computed from RGB-D data, as detailed in Section 2. Every time the algorithm receives sensor readings
(i.e. RGB-D point clouds), each particle evaluates its accuracy by checking how likely it would receive such
sensor reading at its current pose. Then the particles are redistributed (resampling) to new poses which are
more likely to be accurate. This iterative process involves moving, sensing and resampling while the set of
particles should converge to a single cluster near the true pose of the robot. For that, weights are computed
8http://wiki.ros.org/amcl
[p.9]
Figure 5: The 3D map of the experiments scenario used as input for the MCL.
for each particle according to its accuracy. Each particle has an associated weight wi such as:
N
X
i=1
wi = 1
(2)
The ﬁlter prediction takes into account the increments provided by the odometry module for the robot state
vector:
∆x = [∆x, ∆y, ∆z, ∆ψ]T
(3)
Such increments are employed to move the poses of the particles according the following expressions:
xt+1
i
=
xt
i + ∆x ∗cos(ψt
i) −∆y ∗sin(ψt
i)
(4)
yt+1
i
=
yt
i + ∆x ∗sin(ψt
i) + ∆y ∗cos(ψt
i)
(5)
zt+1
i
=
zt
i + ∆z
(6)
ψt+1
i
=
ψt
i + ∆ψ
(7)
The values of ∆x, ∆y, ∆z and ∆ψ are modiﬁed randomly following a Normal distribution centered in their
input values and with standard deviations which are proportional to each increment, e.g. σx = kx ∗∆x with
kx > 0. The value of kx is a design parameter that depends on the accuracy of the visual odometry.
Furthermore, the ﬁlter update makes use of a map of the environment, which is provided as a 3D occupancy
grid based on OctoMap (Hornung et al., 2013), as in Figure 5.
As stated before, subsequent received point clouds are transformed to the pose represented by each particle,
and an alignment with the map is evaluated. Since the number of particles can be considerably high, and each
RGB-D point cloud consists of around 300,000 points, the computational cost of performing this operation
is signiﬁcant. In order to reduce the computational load, we compute a 3D probability grid as in (Hornung
et al., 2010) (Lau et al., 2013), in which each position stores a value of how likely it is that such position
falls within an occupied point of the map, instead of storing binary information about occupancy as in the
provided map. Each 3D position pi of the grid is then ﬁlled with probability values according to a speciﬁc
Gaussian distribution centered in the closest occupied point in the map from pi, mapi, and whose variance
σ2 depends on the sensor noise used in the approach.
grid(pi) =
1
√
2πσ2 e−||pi−mapi||2/2σ2
(8)
[p.10]
Figure 6: Evolution of the particle cloud during the ﬂight test, and projection of the current 3D point cloud
on the map from the estimated robot pose.
Such probability grid only needs to be computed once, is not required to be updated for a given environment,
and relieves from performing numerous distance computations between each cloud point for each particle
and its closest occupied point in the map. Besides, each point cloud is ﬁrst transformed according to the
current roll and pitch provided by the on-board IMU. This transformation is done just once per update,
reducing the computational requirements as well.
Then, for every point of the transformed cloud we access its corresponding value in the 3D probability grid.
Such value would be an indicator of how likely is that point to be part of the map. By doing this with every
point of the cloud and adding all the probability values, we obtain a ﬁgure of how well that particle ﬁts the
true location of the aerial robot according to the map. Then, the weight wi of each particle pi is computed.
Assuming that the point cloud is composed by M 3D points cj, the weight is computed by adding all the
associated probability grid values as follows:
wmap
i
= 1
M
M
X
j=1
grid(pi(cj))
(9)
where pi(cj) stands for the transformation of the point to the particle’s state, and grid(pi(cj)) is the
evaluation of the probability grid in such transformed position.
Finally, the resampling stage spreads the particles to the maximum likelihood areas following the low variance
sampler algorithm described in (Thrun et al., 2005). The updated state vector for the aerial robot is then
calculated as the weighted sum of all the particles. Figure 6 shows one of the ﬁnal moments of the experiment,
where we can observe the particle cloud and the associated point cloud projected from the calculated pose
corresponding to the weighted sum of the particles.
Nevertheless, the described technique is not the only option to perform robot localization in our framework.
Any user should be able to provide pose estimations to the subsequent modules of our architecture given
they comply with the interfaces and data types. For example, another suitable approach can be based on the
combination of the available visual odometry with radio-based ranging, as the authors already demonstrated
in (Perez-Grau et al., 2016). These sensors provide distance measurements between them, which can be
employed to bound localization errors. Moreover, such distance measurements could be perfectly integrated
into the MCL ﬁlter update stage in order to combine the particle weights by using both the 3D point clouds
and the distance measurements.
[p.11]
(a) Generated paths by A* (blue) and Theta* (red), and
vertex parents from Theta* (arrows).
(b) Generated path by Lazy Theta* (yellow), and its
vertex parents (arrows).
Figure 7: Lazy Theta* evolution from A*.
4
Motion Planning
Once we have the UAV up and ﬂying based on local perception, the next objective is planning and executing
trajectories in partially known environments, so that we can perform way-point navigation and obstacle
avoidance eﬃciently.
As stated in the introduction, the proposed global and local planners will be graph-based and built upon
a version of Lazy Theta*, which we call Weighted Lazy Theta*, or Lazy-Theta*-W. It is able to reduce
the planning time, maximize as much as possible the probability of success and always obtain the same re-
planned trajectory from an initial to a target position for each map. This paper extends the original weighted
heuristic distance proposed by (Daniel et al., 2010) at two levels. First, this paper proposes weighting the
heuristic distance in the opposite way to (Daniel et al., 2010), i.e. reducing the expanded vertexes in order to
decrease the re-planning time. Secondly, we also add weighting to the symmetric three-dimensional search,
focusing the exploration in a desired asymmetric volume and, therefore, further reducing the planning time.
4.1
Weighted Lazy Theta*
The main disadvantage of A*-like algorithms is that paths are formed by grid edges, so they are often not
the shortest path in the continuous space, so they need a post-smoothing to become realistic trajectories
(Nash et al., 2007). Theta* is built upon A* and it does not constrain paths by graph edges; each expanded
vertex performs a line-of-sight check (Bresenham, 1965) for each unexpanded visible neighbor that allows
the parent of this vertex to be any other graph vertex, and thus it ﬁnds short and realistic looking paths.
Unfortunately, the number of line-of-sight checks that Theta* performs in 3D space is very high, increasing
the computational requirements. Lazy Theta* is introduced as a simple improvement in the Theta* algorithm
that reduces the number of line-of-sight checks, ﬁnding paths faster than the original algorithm (thus reducing
the computation load) without an increase in path length. Examples of paths found by A*, Theta* and
Lazy Theta* are shown in Figure 7, where vertex parents for Theta* and Lazy Theta* can also be seen.
The main properties of our proposed Lazy Theta*-W are the following:
• It reduces the planning time even further. Even though the lazy variant greatly decreases the algo-
rithm runtime, the planning time could be excessive for re-planning if, for example, large obstacles
are present. This is caused by the symmetric 3D expansion of vertexes along the obstacle while
searching for the solution path, as it can be seen at the center of Figure 8.
• It deals with restrictions imposed by the physical location of the optical sensor. In our platform,
there is only one optical sensor placed along the X-axis and pointing forwards with a small tilt angle,
so it does not provide information from neither behind nor above the UAV.
[p.12]
Figure 8: Expanded Vertex (green) and Result Path (red) calculated by Weighted Lazy Theta* to go from
point A to point B avoiding a wall. Goal Weight w is modiﬁed from w = 10 (left), to w = 1 (center) and
w = 0.5 (right)
Thus, the Lazy Theta*-W algorithm variation is based on weighting the heuristic distance as follows:
h(s) = w · c(s, sgoal), with w ∈R+
(10)
where this h-value is the straight line distance from a vertex s to the goal vertex sgoal, which could be
weighted with positive weights w. As it can be seen in Figure 8, where the start position is in front of a wall
and the goal is behind the wall, if w is less than one, the search expands more vertexes, so the algorithm
would be able to get shorter paths at the expense of increasing the planning time. However, the possible
path length decrease is not guaranteed and it would be only a slight reduction in comparison with the high
runtime increment, as it is shown in the experiments of Figure 10a. Rather, if w is greater than one, the
expanded number of vertexes is reduced, greatly decreasing the runtime and without implying a signiﬁcant
increase in the length of the resulting paths, as it can also be seen in those ﬁgures. These experiments show
that a higher value, up to w = 10, is a good weight choice, obtaining a path planning time of 0.24 seconds
(an 82.5% improvement from the original Lazy Theta*) for a path length increase of only 0.18 meters (just
2.3% longer than the original Lazy Theta* path).
The second improvement is focused on dealing with the sensor ﬁeld-of-view restriction and a further reduction
of the planning time. Unlike ground robots, aerial robots usually have restrictions in the number and type
of on-board sensors to acquire environment information. Particularly, it is unusual to have 360◦sensing
coverage in UAVs. On-board sensors are commonly arranged so that the perception in the direction of ﬂight
is maximized. While such sensor distribution is a good trade-oﬀbetween weight and perception, it might be
harmful to perform local re-planning without any restrictions, because the awareness in the vertical axis is
usually reduced. Therefore, it is necessary to be aware of this limitation and take it into account in the path
re-planning, not entirely disabling height changes, but preferably choosing paths with small height variations.
The proposed local re-planner will prioritize the horizontal planning over the vertical one in order to address
this issue.
The implementation is based on the ﬁrst algorithm variation, but weighting the height axis with the
straight line distance cost function c(s, sgoal) by the zw parameter as described in Equation (11), where
sgoal = [sx, sy, sz] is the goal position. As shown in Figure 9, by increasing the height weight zw, the Z-axis
exploration is reduced, prioritizing the horizontal planning and, therefore, decreasing the algorithm runtime
without an appreciable path length increment, while enabling a possible vertical solution if a horizontal path
is not found or too long. As it can be seen in Figure 10b , for a height weight value zw = 5, to which the
z-axis is still enabled, the planning time obtained in the experiment is 0.09 sec, a 62.5% improvement.
c(s, sgoal) =
q
(sgoal,x −sx)2 + (sgoal,y −sy)2 + zw · (sgoal,z −sz)2, with zw ∈R+
(11)
[p.13]
Figure 9: Expanded Vertex (green) and Result Path (red) calculated by Weighted Lazy Theta* to go behind
a wall. Height Weight zw is modiﬁed from zw = 0.5 (left), to zw = 5 (center) and zw = 20 (right)
10 0
10 1
w
10 -2
10 -1
10 0
10 1
10 2
     Planning Time [sec] 
7.6
7.7
Path Length [m]
 Planning time
 Expanded vertices
 Path length
(a) Increasing the Goal Weight w
10 -1
10 0
10 1
10 2
zw
10 -2
10 -1
10 0
     Planning Time [sec] 
7.9
 10
Path Length [m]
 Planning time
 Expanded vertices
 Path length
(b) Increasing the Height Weight zw
Figure 10: Path planning results for diﬀerent values of parameters zw and w in consecutive simulations on
a 2.0 GHz Intel i7 CPU. The experiments consist of planning from current UAV position to behind a wall,
with a algorithm resolution of 0.1 m
4.2
Occupancy Maps
The complete motion planning system handles two main diﬀerent occupancy maps, the Global Occupancy
Map (GOM) for the global planner, and the Local Occupancy Map (LOM) for the local planner. The GOM is
built from an Octree (Hornung et al., 2013) with known obstacles, whereas the LOM is updated in real-time
from the point cloud generated by the 3D camera. This point cloud is also pre-processed in order to remove
the outliers and reduce the number of points to a speciﬁc algorithm resolution in order not to overload the
local planner.
Both maps are voxel-based matrices used by the Theta* algorithms to obtain the paths. They are mainly
deﬁned by:
• Voxels resolution. Voxels are the occupancy matrix elements, and their size determines the minimum
distance between the possible states of the UAV. Too high values could make impossible intermediate
needed positions, but if it is set too low the computation load would increase the planning time too
much.
• Occupied points inﬂation. Input occupied points from the Octree (see Figure 11 at the top) or from
the point cloud (see Figure 11 at the bottom) are inﬂated horizontally and vertically by half the
UAV size, plus a safety factor. In this way, the algorithms are able to plan for the geometric center
of the robot avoiding real obstacles and keeping a speciﬁc safety distance.
• Workspace. It is the matrix size, and also represents the planner algorithm axis limits. Its limits are
inﬂated by default to disable planning near the area boundaries, including the ﬂoor and the ceiling.
[p.14]
Figure 11: Top ﬁgure shows the Global Occupancy Map (colored cubes) computed from an input Octree
(gray cubes). Bottom ﬁgure shows the Local Occupancy Map (colored cubes) that is being built from the
depth-camera Point Cloud (colored spheres over the camera image at the bottom right) and the Auxiliary
Occupancy Map, as detailed in Figure 12.
Unlike the GOM, which is considered permanent in the world frame, the LOM is dynamically built at the
local stabilized frame (which is the same as the UAV frame but with zero roll and pitch) in each algorithm
iteration from an Auxiliary Occupancy Map (AOM). This AOM is at the world frame and has the same
size as the GOM, but takes as input the points from the pre-processed point cloud, which are buﬀered and
removed according to the following two principles:
• The input point cloud will always be subject to outliers. Unlike LIDAR sensors, the quality of the
depth information in RGB-D and stereo cameras depends on the imaged scene. Factors like texture,
sunlight or brightness might produce wrong depths that could be transferred into fake obstacles in
the occupancy map.
[p.15]
Pre-Process
PCL
TF
sensor→global
Counts to be
added | removed
AOM
2 | 0
- | 5 - | 4
- | 6 1| 0
- | 7
TF
global→local
Inflate
LOM
0
1
1
1
0
1
Lazy Theta*-W
PC and TF synchronisation
Clear 
around MAV
Point Cloud
Figure 12: Occupancy Maps Flow from the raw point cloud to the Weighted Lazy Theta* occupancy matrix
• Unknown obstacles must be considered dynamic objects in general, so an occupied point cannot be
permanent in the occupancy map.
For these reasons, the AOM elements are not just free or occupied voxels, but also include two counts: a
count to be accepted, i.e. a point in the space needs to be perceived a minimum number of times before setting
the corresponding voxel as occupied; and a count to be removed, i.e. an occupied voxel is kept a maximum
number of times from the last time a corresponding point was seen before being removed. This dynamic
behavior is shown in Figure 12, presenting a simpliﬁed ﬂow diagram of the point cloud processing from the
raw sensor measurements to the Lazy Theta*-W occupancy matrices. The Clear box represents the release
of occupied voxels around the UAV in order to decrease the possibility that the current robot state is within
an occupied voxel. This is likely to occur when the trajectories are very close to the inﬂation of obstacles,
such as in our proposed algorithm, and the transformation of the point cloud may not be consistent for
diﬀerent robot locations.
4.3
Global Planner
The Global Planner (GP) consists in a Lazy Theta*-W algorithm that computes the path from the current
UAV position (or the nearest valid position) to a goal position (or the nearest valid position) in the GOM.
This algorithm could be conﬁgured to re-plan optimally and with height changes (w ≈1 and zw ≈1),
because the global plan is only computed once per goal and, in principle, this planning time is not critical.
Also, this path is post-processed in order to get a global trajectory from the current UAV location to the
ﬁnal goal location.
The global trajectory is computed from the obtained path based on chosen linear and angular (yaw) mean
velocities, a speciﬁc maximum distance between waypoints (wp) and a desired attitude reference evolution
that allows the depth camera to track all possible obstacles along the path. The latter is maybe the most
important factor because the robot only has one front sensor, so it needs to look ahead in the direction of
movement as long as possible in order to ensure a safe global trajectory.
As shown in Figure 13, two yaw tracking methods have been implemented. The ﬁrst one, called yaw ahead
at time, is the simplest option: command to turn around the yaw axis at the waypoint wpi in the direction
to the next one wpi+1, setting yaw ahead from wpi to wpi+1 during the segment si→i+1. Given that the
successful performance of the sensor requires slow yaw rotation rates, and that the camera is pointing at
the ﬂight direction as long as possible, this method is not the safest solution because it may generate blind
movement segments. The second implementation, called yaw in advance, tries to preempt this last possibility
of collision. It computes the yaw reference of the waypoint wpi−1 as the direction from wpi to wpi+1, setting
the yaw ahead from wpi to wpi+1 during the segment si−1→i. This may give the idea that it could also have
inconveniences because the robot would try to focus a waypoint before it has achieved the previous setpoint.
However, during the previous segment, the sensor has already seen this last setpoint so that problem does
not really exist.
[p.16]
Figure 13: Global planning and result trajectory using the two implemented yaw tracking methods. The
resulted attitudes are shown as arrows.
The path segmentation has two objectives. The ﬁrst one is to guarantee that the trajectory waypoints are
close enough to each other so that time references, computed from mean velocities, and attitude references
are realistic. In this way, it is possible to compute yaw references at close positions that enable safe tracking
of possible obstacles along the path. The second objective is to have the origin and the goal of a potential
re-planning as close as possible to each other. As a result, the original global trajectory is less modiﬁed after
several re-planning operations, and the local re-planning time is shorter.
As noted above, if the initial or the goal positions are occupied voxels, the planner will not be able to compute
a path, so it is necessary to ﬁnd the nearest neighbor of the occupied position. Such search is carried out
from the nearest to the furthest voxel layer on the discrete square pyramid (Johnson solid J1) with base
centered at the occupied voxel, as shown in Figure 14.
Finally, the global planner implements a state machine over the local planner and the trajectory tracker to
ensure that the goal is reached or to stop the trajectory execution if the re-planning fails a given number of
times.
10 
13 
11
9
7
17
16 
15
18
z
x
y
0
x
y
z
2
1
5
4
4
3
5
2
x
y
z
Figure 14: Search progression from the occupied voxel to further voxel layers on a regular square pyramid
[p.17]
4.4
Local Planner
The Local Planner (LP) is a two-step procedure that handles the global trajectory according to the LOM
information, as illustrated in Algorithm 1. First, it checks if re-planning is really necessary (checkReplan()
function) due to the presence of an obstacle, provided by the point cloud, intersecting the global trajectory.
Otherwise, the trajectory is free of collisions and its execution can continue. Secondly, if re-planning is
necessary, the replan() function is executed to try to avoid the newly detected obstacle by getting a new and
safe global trajectory. Figure 15 presents two re-planning cases during the same global trajectory execution.
In the ﬁrst case (at the left of the ﬁgure), the re-planning is caused by an object which was known but
wrongly-positioned in the GOM, and hence was incorrectly avoided by the global planner. Nevertheless, the
sensor point cloud is used to detect and correctly relocate the obstacle in the LOM, and the local planner
can safely avoid it.
It must also be noted that the local planner tries to re-plan following the original
global trajectory, by only changing the trajectory segment aﬀected by the new obstacle. In this case, the
planner uses local information because the GOM might have been modiﬁed or wrongly positioned due to
localization errors. In the second case (at the right of the ﬁgure), there is another object along the way
which is completely unknown to the global planner, but the local planner avoids it smoothly.
The checkReplan() and replan() functions are described in Algorithm 2. The ﬁrst one consecutively checks
if all the waypoints from the current robot position to the last waypoint inside the local workspace have
line-of-sight9 (LoS) with its predecessor. If at least one of these pairs of consecutive waypoints does not have
LoS, re-planning will be necessary. Then, the origin of the re-planning will be the current robot position,
and the target waypoint of the re-planning will be the ﬁrst one that has LoS with its predecessor after the
interrupted segments, which is the ﬁrst trajectory segment without obstacle (see again Figure 15 and check
the green lines).
The replan() function makes use of a fast Lazy Theta*-W to get a collision-free sub-trajectory that replaces
its corresponding trajectory segment, getting a new and safe global trajectory. Previous to the re-plan, this
function checks if the origin and the target of re-planning are valid positions (non-occupied voxels inside
the local workspace). The origin is the current robot position, that could be occupied, and the target could
be, for example, the last waypoint inside the local workspace, which may be occupied too. Therefore, if
9Actually, the local planner implements a soft line-of-sight check that also considers as valid the visibility from near voxels
to the origin waypoint and near voxels to the target waypoint. In this way, it avoids several re-planning operations due to
possible point cloud noise.
Algorithm 1: Local Planner main loop
Data: PointCloud, RobotState and GlobalTrajectory
Loop
if New GlobalTrajectory then
LP ⇐GlobalTrajectory
send(GlobalTrajectory)
if GlobalTrajectory →Waypoints > 0 then
LP →updateAOM(PointCloud, RobotState)
if LP →checkReplan() then
if LP →replan() then
GlobalTrajectory ⇐LP
send(GlobalTrajectory)
else
status(replanfailure)
else
LP →cleanAOM()
at replan rate
[p.18]
Figure 15: Consecutive re-planning sub-trajectories (green line and green cubes) of the Local Planner along
a global trajectory (red line and orange cubes) given two waypoints, one around the middle of the grid and
another one at the top (marked as Goal). GOM and LOM are shown in grey and blue/purple respectively.
Left image shows the UAV avoiding a known wall that is placed incorrectly in the GOM, whereas the right
image shows the UAV avoiding a fully-unknown wall.
one of them are not valid, it will search the nearest appropriated positions, using the same procedure as
for the Global Planner shown in Figure 14. Finally, if replan() was executed, the new global trajectory is
post-processed to get the correct yaw in advance and time references for all its waypoints.
In order to achieve on-line re-planning, the Lazy Theta*-W conﬁguration must take into account the limited
amount of time between perception and reaction to an a priori unknown obstacle, and also the visual sensor
ﬁeld-of-view restriction. For these reasons, both the Goal Weight and the Height Weight parameters must
be greater than one (e.g., w = 10 and zw = 4) in order to achieve fast re-planning times and limited height
variation. Besides, the resolution of the LOM could be slightly increased, as it can be observed in Figure 15,
to decrease re-planning times even more.
As noted in sub-section 4.2 regarding occupancy maps, the points corresponding to detected objects are
inﬂated in order to keep a safe distance between the UAV and the obstacles. However, such distance could
be equal to the robot size plus just a few centimeters, which is not enough if the detected object is a human
or another UAV. In the case of human detection, the local planner includes a inﬁnite cylinder (along all
workspace’s Z axis) with radius of at least 1.2 meters from the detected human position in the LOM. The
inﬁnite Z-axis inﬂation makes impossible to re-plan above the person, while the safe distance radius ensures
that the robot does not violate the human’s personal space (Maraj et al., 2015). If another UAV is detected,
which is usually in movement, the best way to avoid collisions is to go around its trajectory. In this case,
the local planner also includes an inﬁnite cylinder but in the estimated ﬂight direction of the detected UAV,
for example re-planning over it if its trajectory is approximately horizontal.
4.5
Trajectory Tracking
Path tracking is usually referred to as the task to complete a path as fast as possible under the vehicle
physical constraints (Niermeyer et al., 2016). In contrast, trajectory tracking classically requires that the
vehicle is at a certain time at a certain position. The target of the Trajectory Tracking module is the latter,
accomplishing that all trajectory waypoints wpi = [xi, yi, zi, ψi, ti] are safely reached, where ψ refers to the
[p.19]
Algorithm 2: Local Planner replanning functions
Data: RobotState, GlobalTrajectory and LocalWorkspace
checkReplan()
LocalSubTrajectory ⇐GlobalTrajectory
wpmiddle := wporigin := RobotState
wptarget := LocalSubTrajectory →First waypoint
ExistReplanning := false
while wptarget ∈LocalWorkspace do
if ∃lineOfSight(wpmiddle,wptarget) then
if ExistReplanning then
return true
else
ExistReplanning := true
wpmiddle := wptarget
wptarget := LocalSubTrajectory →Next waypoint
if ExistReplanning then
wptarget := LocalSubTrajectory →Last waypoint ∈LocalWorkspace
return true
else
return false
end
replan()
if wporigin is occupied then
searchNearValidPosition(wporigin)
if wptarget is occupied then
searchNearValidPosition(wptarget)
patch ⇐ThetaStar(wporigin, wptarget)
if patch := NULL then
return false
else
GlobalTrajectory ⇐LocalSubTrajectory ∪patch
return true
end
yaw angle of the aerial robot and t refers to the time from start in which the waypoint has to be reached (see
Figures 13 and 15). It guarantees that the input waypoints are reached within the speciﬁed times, as long
as these positions and times meet the physical limitations of the robotic platform. If the physical limitations
are not met, then the waypoints’ positions will be reached but not at the speciﬁed times. There are some
additional requirements that imply the following:
• Time references must be the highest value among the minimum necessary time to achieve the required
linear and angular displacement in each axis (X, Y, Z and yaw). Hence it ensures that we have enough
time to reach the waypoint in all the axes. This is critical in order to make sure that the camera is
pointing at the direction of ﬂight as long as possible.
• The transitions between waypoints must be smooth and without overhead. As shown in Figure 16,
the continuous trajectory can be generated using spline interpolation, but this does not guarantee
to comply with safety distances with respect to obstacles.
Following the straight line between
waypoints is the only way to ensure that the UAV stays away from known or detected obstacles
along the complete trajectory, because the solution of Theta* algorithm only guarantees the LoS
between them.
[p.20]
Figure 16: Possible trajectories from the raw path (blue spheres) using splines interpolation (green line) and
straight lines (red line)
For that purpose, we need a continuous trajectory generator from the discrete trajectory waypoints, and
a trajectory executor to the robot controller. The trajectory generator computes velocity commands for
each robot axis along each trajectory segment si→i+1 (from wpi to wpi+1), according to the velocity at the
beginning of the line segment vi (at wpi) and based in a piece-wise linear model of the UAV linear velocities:
vi(t) =





vi
if
t < tref
i
+ τ
m(t −(tref
i
−τ))
if
tref
i
+ τ ≤t ≤tp
i
vref
i
if
t > tp
i
(12)
where vref
i
is the target value of the velocity reference along si→i+1, tref
i
is the instant when the change of
velocity occurs, tp
i (peak time) is the instant at which vref
i
is achieved, m is the estimated permanent velocity
rate (the maximum acceleration) and τ is the velocity delay.
This model is integrated using Equation (13) along all trajectory segments. Due to the fact that the change of
velocity references is anticipated to each previous trajectory segment, this system does not depend directly
on tref
i
, but rather on tref
i+1.
For the same reason, the velocity rates mi and mi+1 (at wpi and wpi+1
respectively) are computed as the slopes from vref
i
to the velocity at the start and at the end segment
waypoints respectively.





























xi+1 −xi =
R ti+1
ti
vi(t)dt
with
ti < ti+1
mi = vref
i
−vi
tp
i −ti
with
ti < tp
i < tref
i+1
and
|mi|= m
mi+1 =
vi+1 −vref
i
ti+1 −tref
i+1 −τ
with
tref
i+1 < ti+1
and
|mi+1|= m
vi ≈vref
i−1 + vref
i
2
if
sign(vref
i−1) = sign(vref
i
),
else
vi = 0
vi+1 ≈vref
i
+ vref
i+1
2
if
sign(vref
i
) = sign(vref
i+1),
else
vi+1 = 0
(13)
The previous system presents ﬁve equations and ﬁve variables: vref
i−1, vref
i
, vref
i+1, tref
i+1 and tp
i , assuming that
the velocity at the waypoints, vi and vi+1, are known. Actually, these depend on velocity references except
in the changes of direction (yaw angle), where they are set to zero for safety reasons. Because of this, we use
an iterative method to solve the problem, initializing all the variables to an average value of the segments
[p.21]
mean velocities ( ∆x
∆t ) and updating them according to velocity references from the solution of the previous
iteration (last two equations).
The ﬁnal generated trajectory reference is composed by the vref and tref vectors. The execution is carried
out by sending position and velocity commands (pcmd, vcmd) to the controller, that are computed linearly
from vref and the robot odometry in each trajectory segment and in each instant of time. In addition, rate
limiters are applied to pcmd and vcmd to take into account the physical limitations of the robot and the
desired smoothness in the movements.
5
Field Experience
This section provides information about the experimental experience gathered by the authors over two years
of testing. Prior to the discussion of the experimental results, the setup describing all the elements involved
is presented in the next subsections.
5.1
Architecture framework
Our approach uses as middleware the Robot Operating System (ROS) (Quigley et al., 2009), which is widely
used in research activities and is becoming a de facto standard for robotic applications.
The interfaces
between modules are based on standard ROS data types for transformations, pose estimations or trajectory
commands. This greatly improves the ﬂexibility of the architecture to allow testing custom high-level algo-
rithms for autonomous operation, while at the same time enables the use of UAVs from diﬀerent vendors and
a wide variety of sensors for which supported drivers are already available. We have made extensive use of the
tools available in ROS to help debugging and detecting issues in both hardware and software. This includes
simulations run in Gazebo, logging and playing back data from diﬀerent experiments or visualization and
inspection tools. This is especially useful when an innovative approach or algorithm is under development,
and there is a potential risk of crashing the platform. Thanks to the use of these tools, it is possible to
test the algorithms and modules oﬀ-line and debug internal states of the UAV or present relevant data in a
graphical interface.
5.2
UAV platform
The UAV used to demonstrate our architecture is a research prototype from Ascending Technologies called
AscTec Neo showed in Figure 17. It is a hexacopter with 9” propellers which can lift up to 2Kg, but the
maximum nominal ﬂight time of 20 minutes (without payload) will be reduced accordingly. This is a platform
developed and optimized within the framework of diﬀerent European research projects.
The main sensor on-board the platform was Skybotix’s Visual-Inertial (VI-) Sensor, a stereo camera with
a calibrated and synchronized IMU. We have modiﬁed the payload and the original mount in order to
accommodate diﬀerent sensors. Our architecture has been validated not only with the VI-Sensor, but also
using an RGB-D camera as the main sensor, in particular the Orbbec Astra, as it can be seen in Figure
18. The sensor is mounted facing forward in the direction of the ﬂight in order to maximize the information
gathered regarding possible nearby obstacles.
The orientation of the sensor is customizable as we have
manufactured diﬀerent mounts using a 3D printer. Depending on the main visual sensor mounted on-board
the UAV, the module Sensor-based Odometry needs to be adapted accordingly in order to work with the
type of data that each sensor delivers.
The on-board embedded computer (Intel NUC with Core i7) is in charge of acquiring sensor data, estimating
the aerial robot current state, and generating the appropriate trajectories according to a given navigation
goal.
[p.22]
Figure 17: The AscTec Neo UAV used for the experiments.
Figure 18: The two main sensors tested on-board the UAV: VI-Sensor (left) and Orbbec Astra (right).
5.3
Controlled tests
To succeed in achieving robust autonomous navigation, the aerial robot must demonstrate both reliability and
good performance. Extensive ﬁeld testing has taken place at the indoor testbed of the Center for Advanced
Aerospace Technologies (CATEC). This facility is used to develop and test a wide range of technologies
related to autonomous systems. There is a useful volume of 15x15x5 meters; part of it can be seen in Figure
19. The testbed houses an indoor localization system based on 20 VICON cameras, which only needs the
installation of passive markers on the objects to locate and/or track. This system is able to provide the
position and attitude of each object in real-time with millimetric precision. This tremendously helped us
to benchmark the developed algorithms against a very precise ground truth for robot localization, motion
planning or obstacle avoidance with safe distance assurance.
The goal of the controlled tests performed at this indoor testbed was to monitor our development progress
and measure ﬂying skills of the aerial robot. We also used the tests to evaluate the eﬀects of changes in
hardware and software on the UAV. The ﬂying skills we have systematically tested to assess our progress
were the following:
[p.23]
Figure 19: The indoor testbed at CATEC showing one of the scenarios in which the UAV has been tested,
in this case a piping industrial environment.
• Ability of the UAV to autonomously take-oﬀand perform stable hovering.
• Ability of the UAV to follow a pre-planned obstacle-free trajectory.
• Ability of the UAV to generate an obstacle-free trajectory in order to safely reach a speciﬁc waypoint.
• Ability of the UAV to dynamically modify a generated trajectory towards a waypoint to avoid
perceived obstacles along the way.
As it is apparent in Figure 19, the testbed structure allows us to secure the UAV from the top via a safety
rope to prevent an undesired ﬂight termination. This has been very useful during the development process,
as testing new features in the algorithms may result in unexpected behaviors.
The UAV running the proposed architecture has been extensively tested in order to fulﬁll all these ﬂying
skills, which were meant to guide our development towards high-level autonomous tasks. These tasks are
listed below:
• State Estimation: the purpose of this task is to assess the drift of the visual localization system
and state estimator. Collision-free random trajectories are sent to the UAV and have to be followed
as accurately as possible.
• Reactive Obstacle Avoidance: this task benchmarks reactive collision avoidance. Velocity com-
mands are sent to the aerial robot, steering it towards multiple obstacles of increasing diﬃculty, e.g.
walls, small sticking objects or hanging cables. The task is evaluated according to the minimum
distance between the UAV and the obstacles during the task execution.
• Waypoint Navigation: this task benchmarks local map creation as well as planning. First, the
arena is explored by following a collision-free trajectory (as in Task 2) that covers the arena quite
well, but may leave some unknown spots. After this trajectory is ﬁnished, collision-free paths have
to be planned to several waypoints with increasing diﬃculty, and followed by the UAV.
[p.24]
The Waypoint Navigation involves the interaction of all the key modules from our architecture: visual
odometry, robot localization, global planner, local planner and trajectory tracker. Our core idea is aimed
at achieving a robust system in order to enable the safe integration of UAVs in scenarios were they are
currently not able to operate. For this reason, since the only source of information for obstacle avoidance
was the frontal vision-based sensor, the concept of ﬂying in any direction was discarded from the beginning.
Our system would always turn its front sensor towards the direction of the ﬂight in order to ensure a safe
trajectory and avoid any obstacle that it would encounter. That may result in a slightly slower system,
however this approach is far more robust than moving in any direction without guarantee of ﬂying through
an obstacle-free trajectory.
5.4
Obstacle avoidance tests
Another set of ﬂight tests was performed using our architecture in order to validate speciﬁc functionalities
according to the safe introduction of aerial robots in aircraft manufacturing plants. These tests included
tasks related to the interaction of the aerial robot with other agents in its environment, such as human
workers or other aerial robots. Hence, obstacle detection and avoidance were basic tasks that our system
needed to tackle. Figure 20 shows two of the experiments we carried out. In these experiments, the VI-
Sensor was the main visual sensor on-board the UAV. Visual Odometry was performed using the approach
from (Perez-Grau et al., 2016) based on a stereo camera, which implements a similar pipeline as the one
described in Section 2. However, at this time the Robot Localization module did not use the approach from
Section 3; instead, we made use of S-PTAM (Pire et al., 2015), a stereo SLAM system able to compute the
camera trajectory in real-time. It heavily exploits the parallel nature of the SLAM problem, separating the
time-constrained pose estimation from less pressing matters such as map building and reﬁnement tasks.
The ﬁrst experiment aimed at performing autonomous robot navigation while keeping a safe distance from
human workers in the factory, emulated by a mannequin. A waypoint was provided to the global planner
in order to send the UAV 5m forward with a speed of 0.3m/s, enforcing a collision situation where the
mannequin is an obstacle in the trajectory commanded to the UAV. Whenever the system detected the
mannequin, approximately at a distance of 2m, the local planner automatically took over and recalculated
the trajectory in order to always keep a safe distance from the obstacle, and also changing the yaw angle so
it remained at sight while it was being avoided, until the UAV returned to the original trajectory generated
from the global planner. The top part of Figure 21 shows the human worker detection and the replanned
trajectory around the inﬂated occupancy matrix centered on the estimated obstacle position. Our target
safe distance to maintain from the human worker was 1.25m. During the experiment, we achieved an average
separation distance from the UAV to the mannequin of 1.35m. Figure 22 shows the UAV pose estimation
results from the Robot Localization module. Changes in yaw slightly aﬀected the localization, especially in
Figure 20: The UAV performing obstacle detection and avoidance of a human worker (left) and another
smaller UAV (right).
[p.25]
(a) Mannequin experiment
(b) Multi-UAV experiment
Figure 21: Obstacle detection and trajectory replanning in obstacle avoidance tests. Left images show the
occupation matrix around the estimated position of the obstacle and the replanned trajectory (green cubes)
to avoid it compared to the original trajectory (orange cubes). Right pictures show the on-board camera
image and the estimated relative position of the detected obstacle as a reference frame.
y axis, but errors in general are acceptable, as Table 1 shows.
The second experiment involved autonomous conﬂict avoidance between aerial robots sharing the same space
in large factories. A second smaller UAV (AscTec Hummingbird) was used and commanded to perform an
oﬀ-line pre-planned trajectory, navigating using the motion capture system of the ﬂying arena. Again, the
global planner was sent a waypoint so that the UAV needed to move 5m forward at 0.3m/s, and hence
the generated trajectory implied a conﬂict with the one commanded to the smaller UAV, which was sent
a perpendicular trajectory. The system detected the obstacle thanks to the visual sensor at around 1.5m,
and then the local planner automatically resolved the conﬂict by increasing the ﬂight height as it is shown
in Figure 21. The safe distance to the obstacle was again 1.25m, but the replanning strategy was diﬀerent
due to the height change. During the experiment we achieved an average separation distance (on the XZ
[p.26]
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
x (m)
0
2
4
6
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
y (m)
-2
0
2
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
z (m)
-1
0
1
2
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
yaw (deg)
0
50
100
150
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
x error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
y error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
z error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
yaw error (deg)
0
5
10
(a) Mannequin experiment
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
x (m)
0
2
4
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
y (m)
-1
0
1
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
z (m)
0
1
2
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
yaw (deg)
0
20
40
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
x error (m)
0
0.2
0.4
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
y error (m)
0
0.2
0.4
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
z error (m)
0
0.2
0.4
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
yaw error (deg)
0
5
10
(b) Multi-UAV experiment
Figure 22: Estimated UAV position and orientation in obstacle avoidance tests. Left plots show the com-
parison between the UAV ground-truth captured by the motion capture system (red line) and the estimated
UAV localization (green line). Right plots show the computed error associated to each axis (red line) and
the RMS error along the trajectory (blue line).
plane) of 1.32m (with a maximum peak of 1.54m and a minimum peak of 1.14m), very close to the target
safe distance. Figure 22 shows the UAV pose estimation results, and as it can be observed also in Table 1,
errors are much lower in this case, especially because the trajectory did not involve considerable changes in
yaw angle.
[p.27]
Table 1: RMS localization errors
x (m)
y (m)
z (m)
yaw (◦)
Mannequin experiment
0.117
0.302
0.209
1.226
Multi-UAV experiment
0.042
0.024
0.059
3.776
5.5
Validation test
A speciﬁc experimental setup has been conceived to demonstrate the presented approach and explicitly
show detailed information about the underlying algorithms. This time, the UAV main visual sensor was
the Orbbec Astra (RGB-D camera), and the modules Sensor-based Odometry and Robot Localization were
adapted accordingly.
The aerial robot in Figure 17 performed a ﬂight based on local sensing for localization, and was sent a
navigation waypoint in a speciﬁc position of its environment. A 3D map of the scenario is delivered to the
global planner in order to calculate a safe trajectory to reach the waypoint, shown in Figure 26a. Along
the trajectory, the UAV encounters an unforeseen obstacle that forces the local planner to recalculate the
trajectory in order to safely reach the originally commanded waypoint. All the results presented in this
paper were obtained online. The main objective of the experiment is to demonstrate the suitability of the
architecture in real-time during regular operations.
The 3D map of the area was acquired using a RGB-D sensor augmented with several passive markers in
order to retrieve its pose from CATEC’s testbed motion capture system, and hence use that localization to
obtain an accurate occupancy grid. This map was showed in Section 3 and can be seen in Figure 5.
Regarding the aerial robot localization, the results from the Visual Odometry and the Robot Localization
modules are ﬁrst presented. The estimated position and yaw angle during the experiment can be seen in
Figure 23, in which the left plots show the results from the Visual Odometry approach explained in Section
2, and the right plots show the results from the Robot Localization approach explained in Section 3. Roll
and pitch angles are observable through the use of the on-board IMU and hence are not shown in the ﬁgures,
since they are directly integrated in both algorithms (odometry and localization). The plots include the
ground-truth pose provided by the motion capture system at the indoor testbed.
In both cases the estimations closely follow the ground-truth during all the experiment, however it can be
noted that the odometry measurements exhibit slightly higher deviations than those from the localization
algorithm. Figure 24 shows the absolute value of the errors in the estimations during the trajectory execution.
Again the left plots correspond to the Visual Odometry, while the right plots correspond to the Robot
Localization. The plot also shows the computed RMS error for each axis, and as expected the errors are
signiﬁcantly smaller in the case of the localization algorithm. In particular, the plots show serious drifts in the
visual odometry estimations, especially in Y and yaw, which the particle ﬁlter for robot localization was able
to decrease in order to readjust the UAV estimated pose. Table 2 shows the RMS errors for each component
(X, Y , Z and yaw) in order to quantitatively assess this improvement in the aerial robot localization.
Table 2: RMS localization errors
x (m)
y (m)
z (m)
yaw (◦)
Visual Odometry
0.326
0.528
0.297
8.772
Robot Localization
0.141
0.313
0.196
5.833
The total RMS error in position is approximately 0.23 m, which can be considered acceptable for robot
navigation. Errors in Y are slightly higher than the rest of estimations due to the longer distance traveled
[p.28]
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
x (m)
-4
-2
0
2
4
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
y (m)
-6
-4
-2
0
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
z (m)
-1
0
1
2
3
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
yaw (deg)
-150
-100
-50
0
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
x (m)
-4
-2
0
2
4
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
y (m)
-6
-4
-2
0
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
z (m)
-1
0
1
2
3
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
yaw (deg)
-150
-100
-50
0
Figure 23: Estimated UAV position and orientation in the validation test. The plots show the UAV ground-
truth position and yaw captured by the motion capture system (red line), and the estimated UAV position
and orientation (green line) using the proposed approaches for Visual Odometry (left plots) and Robot
Localization (right plots).
through this axis. Besides, if the scenario does not show enough visual features or objects within the working
range of the sensor, the odometry system suﬀers especially when sudden changes take place in yaw angle,
which happened consistently during this experiment in order to avoid the unexpected obstacle.
The algorithms run on an i7 Linux laptop with 2 Cores (4 threads). The particle ﬁlter for robot localization
is conﬁgured work with 500 hypotheses. The visual odometer took an average 90% of a single thread and
the proposed MCL algorithm the 55% of a single thread. This conﬁguration leaves plenty of computation
for robot planning and navigation.
In order to quantitatively assess the performance of our localization approach, we have tested the data from
the validation test against other popular approaches that make use of RGB-D data for robot localization,
either visual odometry and mapping such as CCNY RGBD10, or SLAM approaches such as RTAB-Map11
or RGBD-SLAM12. The plots in Figure 25 show the performance of the same ﬂight data processed oﬄine
using these approaches, and Table 3 summarizes general RMS errors compared to those from our approach.
It can be seen how the RMS errors in X, Y and Z are very similar to the errors of the proposed odometry
approach. So our approach provides an accuracy at the level of the state of the art while keeping robust-
ness and computational eﬃciency as key features. Notice that we did not ﬁne tune the parameters of the
10http://wiki.ros.org/ccny rgbd
11http://wiki.ros.org/rtabmap
12http://wiki.ros.org/rgbdslam
[p.29]
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
x error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
y error (m)
0
1
2
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
z error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
yaw error (deg)
0
10
20
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
x error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
y error (m)
0
1
2
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
z error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
yaw error (deg)
0
10
20
Figure 24: Position and orientation errors through time in the validation test. The plots show the computed
error of the estimated position and orientation with respect to the ground-truth (red line), using the proposed
approaches for Visual Odometry (left plots) and Robot Localization (right plots). The estimated RMS errors
for each axis are also shown (blue line).
Table 3: RMS localization errors
x (m)
y (m)
z (m)
yaw (◦)
Our approach
0.141
0.313
0.196
5.833
CCNY RGBD-Tools
1.075
0.220
0.710
15.917
RTAB-Map
0.285
0.174
0.734
9.25
RGBD-SLAM
0.470
0.583
0.617
9.849
algorithms, so a better accuracy could be achieved.
From the point of view of the global planner, the experiment consists in reaching a speciﬁc goal position,
that is at the right and behind the UAV from its initial location, by generating a path as short as possible in
an admissible time, previously knowing the ﬁxed obstacles (e.g. a workbench) in the global map showed in
Figure 26a. Therefore, the global planner is conﬁgured to explore symmetrically in the three XYZ dimensions:
zw = 1, but focusing the searchono the goal position: w = 10, thereby reducing the planning time. The
resulting global trajectory passes over the table, it is very close to the shortest path and it takes only 0.21
seconds to be obtained.
The global trajectory waypoints are computed to reach the yaw in advance, as it was explained in the
[p.30]
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
x (m)
-2
0
2
Ground Truth
Our approach
CCNY-RGBD
RTABMAP
RGBD-SLAM
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
y (m)
-6
-4
-2
0
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
z (m)
-2
0
2
time (s)
0
50
100
150
200
yaw (deg)
-150
-100
-50
0
Figure 25: Estimated UAV position and orientation using other approaches based on RGB-D sensors.
global planner subsection, so the UAV starts turning around from the current location to the ﬁrst waypoint
direction. As it can be observed in Figure 26b, the unforeseen obstacle (a worker around the workbench)
is perceived before the vehicle starts moving horizontally, so the local planner avoids it in advance. The
replanner algorithm is conﬁgured to replan as quickly as possible: w = 10 and zw = 4, prioritizing the
horizontal paths in addition. The resulting replanning trajectories takes a maximum of 1.14 milliseconds to
generate a new path to avoid the obstacle, with a path length increment of 1.42 meters with respect to the
global trajectory length, being the horizontal inﬂation of 1 meter and the algorithm resolution of 0.1 meters.
Figure 27a shows that the UAV always keeps a safe distance even if the human detector is not enabled,
which is the case of this experiment.
Actually, a total of 13 consecutive replanning trajectories have been computed since the on-board camera
sees the unknown obstacle, but as it is shown in Figure 27, all the trajectories are consistent and very close
to each other. This relatively high number of replanning operations in the experiment is due to the fact that
new captured points of the obstacle are continuously captured as the UAV moves around avoiding it, which
makes the replanned trajectory increasingly safer. The average replanning time is 0.642 milliseconds, even
though some replanning computations are very simple problems to solve a trajectory from a waypoint to the
next one.
[p.31]
(a) Global trajectory on GOM from the octomap
(b) First replanned trajectory on LOM from the point
cloud shown in the on-board camera
Figure 26: Global and local planners trajectories and occupancy maps during the experiment
(a) Replanning times and distances to unforeseen obstacle
(b) First four consecutive replanned trajectories
Figure 27: Times and resulting trajectories to avoid the unforeseen obstacle
The rates at which the diﬀerent modules of the architecture are running or carrying out computations are
discussed below. In the obstacle avoidance tests, the VI-Sensor is delivering stereo-image pairs at 20 Hz.
Sensor-based Odometry processes each frame in approximately 50 ms after downsampling the input images,
which allows for real-time computation. Robot Localization based on S-PTAM delivers pose estimations
at around 15 Hz, thanks to internal optimizations. Since the Controller is running at 100 Hz, the state
estimation frequency is increased by combining it with IMU measurements through a ﬁlter. Regarding the
Trajectory Planner, the update rate of the auxiliary obstacle map works at lower frequencies because it needs
to wait until the points are seen several times to be considered obstacles. The number of times needed to
be seen is set to 5, which produces an obstacle in the map after 25 ms of continuous sight. Finally, the
checkReplan function from Algorithm 2 is performed every 100 ms in order not to overload the processing
unit. Regarding the validation test, the main diﬀerence is related to the main sensor and the state estimation;
the Orbbec Astra was conﬁgured to deliver images at 15 Hz (half of its full operational frequency) in order
to leave processing power to the modules of our architecture. Sensor-based Odometry is able to generate
motion estimations also at 15 Hz, as well as our Robot Localization approach based on MCL, allowing for
real-time on-line state estimation.
[p.32]
Figure 28: Sample RGB images from the front camera during high-speed tests.
5.6
High-speed tests
In order to prove the robustness of our localization approach, also under fast motions of the UAV, a series
of additional tests have been performed. For safety reasons, the tests have consisted in manually carrying
the UAV to reproduce high-speed ﬂights in the same scenario at CATEC’s testbed where the validation test
took place. Sample images from these tests are shown in Figure 28, where motion blur is clearly visible.
Two diﬀerent strategies have been validated. First, ample movements involving displacements mainly in y
axis have been performed. Secondly, more reduced movements in y axis, with more changes in yaw, have
been carried out at faster motions.
The comparison between ground-truth data and our localization estimation can be seen in Figure 29, as well
as error plots. In the ﬁrst test, the UAV speed reaches 1.2m/s, since it traverses nearly 9 m in around 7
seconds several times, between t = 20s and t = 55s. In the second test, higher speeds of up to 1.5m/s are
reached especially between t = 14s and t = 20s.
As it can be observed, RMS errors in position are below 0.3m, while errors in yaw rarely exceed 10 degrees.
The estimations closely follow the ground-truth, except for the ﬁnal part of the second high-speed test,
where z estimations do not decrease while the UAV was manually carried to the ﬂoor. This issue should
not represent any inconvenience in regular UAV operations, since the rest of experimental results from this
section did not show similar behaviors.
6
Lessons learned
While the system performs well, there is still room for improvement in its performance and the development
process. Field testing is one of the most expensive tasks when it comes to developing an autonomous system
because the aerial platform must be fully operational before carrying out ﬂight experiments, a space for
testing must be accessible and speciﬁc qualiﬁed staﬀmust be available (including a safety pilot). Besides,
if testing outdoors the weather must behave, and depending on national regulations a valid license for the
UAV pilot might be required.
An important factor to take into consideration when testing aerial robots is their ﬂight autonomy. Degra-
dation of batteries is a signiﬁcant issue that we have encountered during extensive test campaigns, forcing
us to test within limited ﬂight times until replacements can be available. Simulation environments such as
Gazebo 13 have been very useful for testing the behavior and integration of diﬀerent modules, especially
those related to motion planning. However the simulations are still limited in order to provide accurate
information regarding real-world scenarios or behaviors of the actual system.
13http://gazebosim.org/
[p.33]
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
x (m)
-4
-3
-2
-1
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
y (m)
-5
0
5
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
z (m)
0
1
2
3
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
yaw (deg)
-40
-20
0
20
40
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
x error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
y error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
z error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
yaw error (deg)
0
10
20
(a) First high-speed test
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x (m)
-4
-3
-2
-1
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
y (m)
-5
0
5
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
z (m)
0
1
2
3
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
yaw (deg)
-40
-20
0
20
40
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
y error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
z error (m)
0
0.5
1
time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
yaw error (deg)
0
10
20
(b) Second high-speed test
Figure 29: Estimated UAV position and orientation in high-speed tests. Left plots show the comparison
between the UAV ground-truth captured by the motion capture system (red line) and the estimated UAV
localization (green line). Right plots show the computed error associated to each axis (red line) and the
RMS error along the trajectory (blue line).
[p.34]
A very convenient tool that the team have extensively used during all of our testing is the node manager
developed by Fraunhofer FKIE 14. It is a graphical interface to manage nodes, topics, services, parameters
and launch ﬁles in a ROS network. It seamlessly handles the discovery of running ROS masters in the
local network and the synchronization of the local ROS master to the discovered remote masters. This is
very useful because all the algorithms are running in the on-board computer, and then visualization and
debugging tools can be used in the ground computer in order to watch live sensor data or check the expected
behavior of speciﬁc algorithms that are under test.
Another useful tool that has been widely used for testing the Trajectory Planner and Trajectory Tracker
modules is the RotorS 15 (Furrer et al., 2016). It is a UAV simulator based on Gazebo that provides some
multi-rotor models, simulated sensors such as the VI-Sensor, and diﬀerent possibilities for the simulated
UAV controllers.
Most of the environments in which our system has been tested have been static scenarios. While signiﬁcant
progress has been made during ﬁeld testing, aerial robots must be able to perceive and interact with dynamic
environments in order to be introduced in real world scenarios. Moreover, our system can only handle limited
types of obstacles, such as human workers or other UAVs, in order to carry out a speciﬁc set of actions
accordingly.
The ability to evaluate the performance of the aerial robot in an experiment is a key factor in ﬁeld testing.
Sometimes a tight time schedule has forced us to carry out extensive test campaigns, during which it was
not unusual to adjust several parameters from the localization and planning approaches on the ﬂy. This
leaves room for subjectivity, since human errors can easily arise.
It should be a good idea to develop
automated methods to quantitatively assess recorded data in order to evaluate the robot performance.
This will help gather statistical evidence from the behavior of the diﬀerent algorithms integrated in the
architecture, allowing for proper evaluation.
7
Conclusions
This article presents the overall software architecture and ﬁeld experience gathered after extensive testing
of a UAV platform for autonomous navigation in GPS-denied areas, demonstrating the robustness of the
approach in diﬀerent situations.
Besides, the article gathers speciﬁc innovations in the diﬀerent modules of the proposed architecture in
order to achieve safe and reliable autonomous navigation of the aerial robot. An implementation of Monte
Carlo Localization suitable for operation in 3D environments has been presented. Visual odometry based
on an RGB-D sensor is used along with a previously known map of the environment to provide reliable and
accurate 4D (x, y, z and yaw) estimation. Regarding motion planning, an innovative variant of the Lazy
Theta* algorithm has been developed and tested, in order to decrease planning times, get near-shortest paths
and deal with actual visual sensor restrictions. The use of the proposed motion planners based upon this
algorithm are capable of enabling the introduction of UAVs into environments that are not necessarily fully
known in advance.
The authors are currently preparing to release the source code of some of the algorithms, and add the
corresponding information in the ROS wiki to be publicly available. Although the presented work is based
on speciﬁc implementations of the diﬀerent modules in the architecture, special focus has been put in
maintaining standard and well-deﬁned interfaces between all of them, in order to be reusable and extensible.
Developing this architecture for an autonomous robot has allowed us to test a platform that would perform
in real situations and solve signiﬁcant research problems. Future work will focus on taking into account
14http://wiki.ros.org/node manager fkie
15http://wiki.ros.org/rotors simulator
[p.35]
that such systems would perform autonomous navigation in a wide variety of scenarios, not only the ones
that have been considered so far and which in some cases might represent simpliﬁed versions of real world
environments.
Acknowledgments
This research is a result of a partnership between the University of Seville and the Center for Advanced
Aerospace Technologies (CATEC). Thanks also goes to Angel Luis Petrus.
This work has been partially supported by the EuRoC project funded by the EU FP7 under grant agreement
CP-IP 608849, AEROARMS project funded by the EU H2020 under grant agreement No: 644271, AERO-
MAIN project (DPI2014-5983-C2-1-R) and OCELLIMAV project funded by the Spanish Government, grant
TEC2014-61708-EXP.
References
Achtelik, M. W., Lynen, S., Weiss, S., Kneip, L., Chli, M., and Siegwart, R. (2012). Visual-Inertial SLAM
for a Small Helicopter in Large Outdoor Environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems(IROS).
Bloesch, M., Omari, S., Hutter, M., and Siegwart, R. (2015).
Robust visual inertial odometry using a
direct ekf-based approach. In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2015 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on, pages 298–304. IEEE.
Bohlin, R. and Kavraki, L. E. (2000). Path planning using lazy PRM. In Robotics and Automation, 2000.
Proceedings. ICRA’00. IEEE International Conference on, volume 1, pages 521–528. IEEE.
Bresenham, J. E. (1965). Algorithm for computer control of a digital plotter. IBM Systems journal, 4(1):25–
30.
Burri, M., Oleynikova, H., Achtelik, M. W., and Siegwart, R. (2015). Real-time visual-inertial mapping,
re-localization and planning onboard mavs in unknown environments. In Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pages 1872–1878. IEEE.
Carsten, J., Ferguson, D., and Stentz, A. (2006). 3d ﬁeld d: Improved path planning and replanning in three
dimensions. In Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2006 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pages
3381–3386. IEEE.
Daniel, K., Nash, A., Koenig, S., and Felner, A. (2010). Theta*: Any-angle path planning on grids. Journal
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 39:533–579.
Davison, A., Reid, I., Molton, N., and Stasse, O. (2007). MonoSLAM: Real-Time Single Camera SLAM.
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, 29(6):1052–1067.
Dryanovski, I., Valenti, R. G., and Xiao, J. (2013). Fast visual odometry and mapping from RGB-D data.
In 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pages 2305–2310.
Endres, F., Hess, J., Engelhard, N., Sturm, J., Cremers, D., and Burgard, W. (2012). An Evaluation of the
RGB-D SLAM System. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2012 IEEE International Conference on,
pages 1691–1696.
Furrer, F., Burri, M., Achtelik, M., and Siegwart, R. (2016).
Robot Operating System (ROS).
Stud-
ies Comp.Intelligence Volume Number:625, The Complete Reference (Volume 1)(978-3-319-26052-
5):Chapter 23. ISBN:978-3-319-26052-5.
Geiger, A., Ziegler, J., and Stiller, C. (2011).
StereoScan: Dense 3D Reconstruction in Real-Time.
In
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2011 IEEE, pages 963–968.
[p.36]
Hart, P. E., Nilsson, N. J., and Raphael, B. (1968). A formal basis for the heuristic determination of minimum
cost paths. IEEE transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics, 4(2):100–107.
Heng, L., Honegger, D., Lee, G. H., Meier, L., Tanskanen, P., Fraundorfer, F., and Pollefeys, M. (2014).
Autonomous visual mapping and exploration with a micro aerial vehicle. Journal of Field Robotics,
31(4):654–675.
Honegger, D., Meier, L., Tanskanen, P., and Pollefeys, M. (2013).
An open source and open hardware
embedded metric optical ﬂow cmos camera for indoor and outdoor applications. In ICRA, pages 1736–
1741. IEEE.
Hornung, A., Wurm, K. M., and Bennewitz, M. (2010). Humanoid Robot Localization in Complex Indoor
Environments. In Proc. of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), Taipei, Taiwan.
Hornung, A., Wurm, K. M., Bennewitz, M., Stachniss, C., and Burgard, W. (2013). OctoMap: An eﬃcient
probabilistic 3D mapping framework based on octrees. Autonomous Robots, 34(3):189–206.
Huang, A. S., Bachrach, A., Henry, P., Krainin, M., Fox, D., and Roy, N. (2011). Visual odometry and
mapping for autonomous ﬂight using an rgb-d camera. In In Proc. of the Intl. Sym. of Robot. Research.
Kaess, M., Ranganathan, A., and Dellaert, F. (2008). isam: Incremental smoothing and mapping. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, 24(6):1365–1378.
Karaman, S. and Frazzoli, E. (2011). Sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion planning. The interna-
tional journal of robotics research, 30(7):846–894.
Kerl, C., Sturm, J., and Cremers, D. (2013). Robust odometry estimation for RGB-D cameras. In Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2013 IEEE International Conference on, pages 3748–3754. IEEE.
Kitt, B., Geiger, A., and Lategahn, H. (2010). Visual Odometry based on Stereo Image Sequences with
RANSAC-based Outlier Rejection Scheme. In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV).
Kneip, L., Chli, M., and Siegwart, R. (2011). Robust real-time visual odometry with a single camera and
an imu. In Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference, pages 16.1–16.11. BMVA Press.
Kuﬀner, J. J. and LaValle, S. M. (2000). RRT-connect: An eﬃcient approach to single-query path planning.
In Robotics and Automation, 2000. Proceedings. ICRA’00. IEEE International Conference on, volume 2,
pages 995–1001. IEEE.
Labbe, M. and Michaud, F. (2014). Online Global Loop Closure Detection for Large-Scale Multi-Session
Graph-Based SLAM. In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, pages 2661–2666.
Lau, B., Sprunk, C., and Burgard, W. (2013). Eﬃcient grid-based spatial representations for robot navigation
in dynamic environments. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 61(10):1116–1130.
LaValle, S. M. (1998). Rapidly-exploring random trees: A new tool for path planning.
LaValle, S. M. and Kuﬀner Jr, J. J. (2000). Rapidly-exploring random trees: Progress and prospects.
Lepetit, V., Moreno-Noguer, F., and Fua, P. (2008). EPnP: An Accurate O(n) Solution to the PnP Problem.
International Journal of Computer Vision, 81(2):155.
Lim, H., Park, J., Lee, D., and Kim, H. J. (2012). Build Your Own Quadrotor: Open-Source Projects on
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. IEEE Robotics Automation Magazine, 19(3):33–45.
Lourakis, M. A. and Argyros, A. (2009). SBA: A Software Package for Generic Sparse Bundle Adjustment.
ACM Trans. Math. Software, 36(1):1–30.
[p.37]
Maraj, C. S., Lackey, S. J., Badillo-Urquiola, K. A., Ortiz, E. C., and Hudson, I. L. (2015). Modeling
proxemic cues for simulation-based training in virtual environments. In MODSIM World Conference.
Mebarki, R., Lippiello, V., and Siciliano, B. (2016).
Vision-based and imu-aided scale factor-free linear
velocity estimator. Autonomous Robots, pages 1–15.
Michael, N., Shen, S., Mohta, K., Mulgaonkar, Y., Kumar, V., Nagatani, K., Okada, Y., Kiribayashi, S.,
Otake, K., Yoshida, K., et al. (2012). Collaborative mapping of an earthquake-damaged building via
ground and aerial robots. Journal of Field Robotics, 29(5):832–841.
Mur-Artal, R., Montiel, J. M. M., and Tardos, J. D. (2015). ORB-SLAM: a versatile and accurate monocular
SLAM system. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 31(5):1147–1163.
Nash, A., Daniel, K., Koenig, S., and Felner, A. (2007). Thetaˆ*: Any-Angle Path Planning on Grids. In
Proceedings of the national conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, volume 22, page 1177. Menlo Park, CA;
Cambridge, MA; London; AAAI Press; MIT Press; 1999.
Nash, A., Koenig, S., and Tovey, C. (2010). Lazy Theta*: Any-angle path planning and path length analysis
in 3D. In Third Annual Symposium on Combinatorial Search.
Niermeyer, P., Akkinapalli, V. S., Pak, M., Holzapfel, F., and Lohmann, B. (2016). Geometric path following
control for multirotor vehicles using nonlinear model predictive control and 3d spline paths. In Unmanned
Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), 2016 International Conference on, pages 126–134. IEEE.
Oleynikova, H., Burri, M., Lynen, S., and Siegwart, R. (2015). Real-time visual-inertial localization for aerial
and ground robots. In 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), pages 3079–3085.
Oleynikova, H., Burri, M., Taylor, Z., Nieto, J., Siegwart, R., and Galceran, E. (2016). Continuous-time
trajectory optimization for online UAV replanning. In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2016
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pages 5332–5339. IEEE.
Perez-Grau, F. J., Fabresse, F. R., Caballero, F., Viguria, A., and Ollero, A. (2016). Long-term aerial robot
localization based on visual odometry and radio-based ranging. In 2016 International Conference on
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), pages 608–614.
Pinies, P., Lupton, T., Sukkarieh, S., and Tardos, J. (2007). Inertial Aiding of Inverse Depth SLAM using a
Monocular Camera. pages 2797–2802.
Pire, T., Fischer, T., Civera, J., De Crist´oforis, P., and Berlles, J. J. (2015). Stereo parallel tracking and
mapping for robot localization. In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2015 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on, pages 1373–1378. IEEE.
Pivtoraiko, M., Mellinger, D., and Kumar, V. (2013). Incremental micro-UAV motion replanning for explor-
ing unknown environments. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2013 IEEE International Conference
on, pages 2452–2458. IEEE.
Pomerleau, F., Colas, F., Siegwart, R., and Magnenat, S. (2013). Comparing ICP variants on real-world
data sets. Autonomous Robots, 34(3):133–148.
Quigley, M., Conley, K., Gerkey, B., Faust, J., Foote, T., Leibs, J., Wheeler, R., and Ng, A. Y. (2009). ROS:
an open-source Robot Operating System. In ICRA workshop on open source software, volume 3, page 5.
Rosten, E. and Drummond, T. (2006). Machine Learning for High-speed Corner Detection. In Proceedings
of the 9th European Conference on Computer Vision - Volume Part I, ECCV’06, pages 430–443, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Roussillon, C., Gonzalez, A., Sol`a, J., Codol, J., Mansard, N., Lacroix, S., and Devy, M. (2011). RT-SLAM:
A Generic and Real-Time Visual SLAM Implementation, pages 31–40.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
[p.38]
Rublee, E., Rabaud, V., Konolige, K., and Bradski, G. (2011). ORB: An eﬃcient alternative to SIFT or
SURF. In 2011 International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2564–2571.
Schmid, K., Tomic, T., Ruess, F., Hirschmller, H., and Suppa, M. (2013). Stereo vision based indoor/outdoor
navigation for ﬂying robots. In 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, pages 3955–3962.
Sucan, I. A. and Chitta, S. (2013). Moveit! Online Available: http://moveit.ros.org.
Thrun, S., Burgard, W., and Fox, D. (2005). Probabilistic Robotics (Intelligent Robotics and Autonomous
Agents). The MIT Press.
Thrun, S., Fox, D., Burgard, W., and Dellaert, F. (2001). Robust Monte Carlo localization for mobile robots.
Artiﬁcial intelligence, 128(1-2):99–141.
Weiss, S., Scaramuzza, D., and Siegwart, R. (2011). Monocular-SLAMbased navigation for autonomous
micro helicopters in GPS-denied environments. Journal of Field Robotics, 28(6):854–874.
Winterhalter, W., Fleckenstein, F., Steder, B., Spinello, L., and Burgard, W. (2015).
Accurate indoor
localization for rgb-d smartphones and tablets given 2d ﬂoor plans. In 2015 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 3138–3143.
=== END ===
